The celluloid torch has been passed to a new generation: filmmakers who grew up in the 1960s. ``Platoon,'' ``Running on Empty,'' ``1969'' and ``Mississippi Burning'' are among the movies released in the past two years from writers and directors who brought their own experiences of that turbulent decade to the screen. ``The contemporaries of the '60s are some of the filmmakers of the '80s. It's natural,'' said Robert Friedman, the senior vice president of worldwide advertising and publicity at Warner Bros. Chris Gerolmo, who wrote the screenplay for ``Mississippi Burning,'' noted that the sheer passage of time has allowed him and others to express their feelings about the decade. ``Distance is important,'' he said. ``I believe there's a lot of thinking about that time and America in general.'' The Vietnam War was a defining experience for many people in the '60s, shattering the consensus that the United States had a right, even a moral duty to intervene in conflicts around the world. Even today, politicians talk disparagingly of the ``Vietnam Syndrome'' in referring to the country's reluctance to use military force to settle disputes. ``I think future historians will talk about Vietnam as one of the near destructions of American society,'' said Urie Brofenbrenner, a professor of sociology at Cornell University. ``In World War II, we knew what we were fighting for, but not in Vietnam.'' ``Full Metal Jacket,'' ``Gardens of Stone,'' ``Platoon,'' ``Good Morning, Vietnam,'' ``Hamburger Hill'' and ``Bat 21'' all use the war as a dramatic backdrop and show how it shaped characters' lives. The Vietnam War has remained an emotional issue in the United States as veterans have struggled to come to terms with their experiences. One was Oliver Stone, who wrote and directed the Academy Award-winning ``Platoon.'' ``I saw `Platoon' eight times,'' said John J. Anderson, a Palm Beach County sheriff's lieutenant who served in Vietnam in 1966-67. ``I cried the first time I saw it ... and the third and fourth times. `Platoon' helped me understand.'' Stone, who based ``Platoon'' on some of his own experiences as a grunt, said the film brought up issues that had yet to be resolved. ``People are responding to the fact that it's real. They're curious about the war in Vietnam after 20 years,'' he said. While Southeast Asia was the pivotal foreign issue in American society of the '60s, civil rights was the major domestic issue. The civil rights movement reached its peak in the ``Freedom Summer'' of 1964, when large groups of volunteers headed South to help register black voters. In ``Five Corners,'' a movie about the summer of '64 in the Bronx starring Jodie Foster, her friend, played by Tim Robbins, leaves his neighborhood to volunteer in the South after seeing the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. on television. Alan Parker's ``Mississippi Burning'' focuses on an incident that clouded the Mississippi Summer Project _ when 1,000 young volunteers from mainstream America swept into the state to help register black voters. The movie is a fictionalized account of the disappearance and slaying of three civil rights workers: Michael Schwerner, Andrew Goodman and James Chaney. They were reported missing on June 21, several hours after being stopped for speeding near Philadelphia, Miss. After a nationally publicized search, their bodies were discovered Aug. 4 on a farm just outside the town. One of those who recalled the incident was Gerolmo, a student in the New York public school system at the time. The screenwriter said the incident had a powerful effect on his way of thinking. ``It was the first time I ever considered that our country could be wrong,'' Gerolmo said. The film stars Willem Dafoe and Gene Hackman star as FBI agents who try to find the bodies of the missing workers and overcome fierce local resistance to solve the crime. In a more offbeat and outrageous way, John Waters' ``Hairspray'' discusses integration in Baltimore in 1963 when a group of teen-agers tries to break down the barriers of a segregated dance show. Also set in Baltimore is Barry Levinson's ``Tin Men,'' starring Danny DeVito and Richard Dreyfuss as two slick aluminum siding salesmen in the early '60s. The movie mirrored a squarely middle-class culture, one that was not caught up in sex, politics and drugs. Instead of focusing on a well-known historic event, writer-director Ernest Thompson takes a more personal approach in ``1969.'' Robert Downey Jr. and Keifer Sutherland star as college students who battle their parents and each other over sex, drugs and the Vietnam War. ``I was 19 in 1969. It was a fulcrum time for me,'' said Thompson, who was a student at American University at the time. ``I think it was just the right time in my growth as an artist and as a man to try to write about something that happened in my youth.'' ``Running on Empty'' takes place in the '80s but the '60s are much in evidence. Judd Hirsch and Christine Lahti play anti-war activists who sabatoged a napalm plant in 1970 and are forced to live underground with their two children. Naomi Foner, who wrote ``Running on Empty'' and also served as the film's executive producer, grew up in Brooklyn, N.Y., the daughter of sociologists. Her own experiences made Foner well qualified to give ``Running on Empty'' its strong political theme. ``I lived through that time and I've wanted to find the right way to present it to this generation,'' said Foner, a member of the radical Students for a Democratic Society while attending graduate school at Columbia University. Foner, who also taught in Harlem's Head Start program and helped register voters in South Carolina, said many young people are curious about what happened in the '60s. ``A lot of them think it was an exciting time that they were sorry to have missed,'' she said. Brofenbrenner said movies are a good indicator of the concerns of the general public: ``The principle impact of the media is that they reflect the values of the larger society. ``Film is a very powerful art medium,'' he said. ``I believe it very accurately reflects not only the prevailing but the coming trends. It's because film writers, like other writers, are perceptive people. They get the message of what's going on.'' 
For students working in a miniature factory at the University of Missouri-Rolla, the future of American business is now. ``When our students go into industry, they will have state-of-the-art knowledge'' that will affect decisions about expanding the role of robots and automated machines in the workplace, said Sema Alptekin, designer of the futuristic business laboratory. Ms. Alptekin is a mechanical and industrial engineer who directs the university's computer-integrated manufacturing and packaging laboratory. The lab, established two years ago at a cost of $120,000, is the only project of its kind in the state, and one of the more advanced such programs in the country. Tom Akas of the Society of Manufacturing Engineers said Ms. Alptekin has created ``a model for similar laboratories ... Students can see how the factory of the future operates.'' The Society of Manufacturing Engineers has recognized Ms. Alptekin as an Outstanding Young Manufacturing Engineer. In her lab, a conveyer belt at waist level carries parts from storage shelves to a robot that dominates the room like a silent, 4-foot metal sentry. The robot is a V-shaped, jointed arm on a pivoting base. The arm can be fitted to allow it to grasp, lift and turn objects of differing sizes to suit a variety of tasks. The robot then swivels to place parts in position at the automated lathe or milling machine. The entire factory would fit inside a basketball half-court. The machinery is of the type used to make small parts in metal cutting shops, Ms. Alptekin said. Students learn to program a computer and automated machines linked to it in a complete manufacturing operation _ retrieving raw materials from the storage shelf unit, which can be programmed to supply appropriate parts from its inventory; lifting and placing the parts in position with the robot's arm; and shaping parts into finished products at the lathe. Students using the lab have designed and produced engraved key chains and intricate mazes and puzzles out of plastic and plexiglass. But the product is less important than the process. Ms. Alptekin said former students have entered fields as disparate as aviation and financial consulting. In the factory of the future, according to the university's model, human chatter will be replaced by the click-clack of machines. ``Ours is quite unique, it's totally integrated,'' Ms. Alptekin said, referring to programming that allows components such as the automated storage system to ``talk to'' the computer that controls the manufacturing process, informing it about the availability of parts. Ms. Alptekin said it is this aspect that sets the lab apart even from industries where robots and automated machines have become almost commonplace. There, she said, robots perform specific tasks in ``islands of automation,'' but human workers remain responsible for keeping inventory and coordinating different aspects of the production line. Ms. Alptekin said automation is widespread in the automobile industry, but she would like to see it expanded. ``It should be used in any industry,'' she said. ``It's difficult to justify economically, but if quality is the concern, then it can be easily justified. ``At least our students will be aware of the enhancements and developments in this area, and when they make decisions as engineers and managers, they will take this into consideration,'' she said. A master's candidate analyzed the existing system with an eye to altering it to create a new product. Ms. Alptekin said the student identified what new production components were necessary and determined how they could be integrated into the system. A doctoral candidate is developing computer software that will allow the system to diagnose itself. The system could be programmed to recognize when a component is not working, and then decide to switch to manufacturing a product that does not involve the disabled component, much as human managers would react. Graduate student Bob Borchelt said the equipment he is using is on the cutting edge of manufacturing. ``Truthfully, I can't say that I was expecting this level of expertise,'' he said. ``I know that our lab is one of the best of its kind in an educational institution.'' The lab, like the entire engineering management program, calls on computing, mechanical, electrical and chemical skills _ and teamwork. ``For us, for managers, the entire system is important,'' Ms. Alptekin said. Ms. Alptekin said she is continually fine-tuning the lab. This past year, the original robot was replaced with one able to perform more tasks. She now is considering purchasing a robot with vision sophisticated enough to act as an inspector. The university spent $30,000 to upgrade lab equipment in 1987. An estimated $60,000 to $70,000 was earmarked in 1988. International Business Machines Corp. recently pledged $1.2 million in computer equipment and software to the university as part of an IBM program to aid 48 college-based robotics labs across the country. ``Studies show that there's a severe national shortage of instructional materials in this growing and critical area,'' said Andy Russell, a spokesman for IBM. ``IBM will benefit because we will be helping to train the (computer-integrated manufacturing) workers and decision makers of today and tomorrow.'' 
An early morning house fire killed a woman and a firefighter who was fatally injured as he searched the house, officials said Saturday. Four other members of the woman's family were injured. Fire Investigator Ray Mauck said the 4 a.m. fire started in the front room of the house in northwest Wichita but he would not comment on the cause. ``We are fairly sure at this time that it was an accidental fire,'' he said. Killed were Tilda Sue Price, 53, and firefighter C.C. Killingsworth, 39, a 17-year veteran of the Wichita Fire Department. Mrs. Price's husband, Everett Price, 63, and their daughters, Corine, 22, and Valrie, 16, escaped and were in serious condition Saturday night at St. Francis Regional Medical Center, hospital officials said. Another firefighter was treated for minor injuries and released. Killingsworth's colleagues praised him a dedicated firefighter. ``He was a very aggressive firefighter. He loved the work he was in,'' said acting Fire Chief Larry Garcia said. ``He couldn't be bested in terms of his willingness and his ability to do something to help you survive.'' Firefighters never reached Mrs. Price, who was trapped in her bedroom, Garcia said. They had to cut short their rescue effort just before the roof caved in. The woman's daughters escaped from a second-story bedroom by climbing down ladders put up on the side of the house by firefighters. 
In the nation's capital, where the federal government's war on drugs is mapped out, young Washingtonians fighting over drugs were killing each other at a rate of more than one a day during 1988. The District of Columbia's drug problems dramatize the two different Washingtons _ the Capitol, the White House and other sites visited by millions of tourists each year, and the squalid neighborhoods tucked away from the traditional seats of power. There, a more vicious power struggle is contested among teens drawn to the status and money that come from selling drugs. In 1988, 371 persons had been killed in the nation's capital as of Dec. 30, far surpassing the previous high total of 287, set in 1969. Police blame drugs _ particularly the arrival of crack cocaine _ for about 60 percent of the slayings. As recently as 1986, drug-related killings accounted for just one-third of the city's homicide total. Although final population and homicide figures have yet to be compared, Washington and Detroit had the two highest per-capita murder rates in America in 1988, meaning the nation's capital could earn the dubious honor of being the nation's murder capital as well. Ironically, the absence of organized crime in Washington may be pushing the murder total even higher. Law enforcement officials note that in cities where organized crime factions control the drug market, there are fewer drug-related slayings. ``What you have here is a lot of young entrepreneurs fighting among themselves for drug turf,'' said Police Chief Maurice T. Turner. ``They are just working for themselves.'' Stemming the city's drug tide has become an increasingly tough battle for Turner and his 3,800 officers. Earlier this year, police switched to .9mm semiautomatic handguns out of fear that weapons commonly found on the street were outclassing the standard .38-caliber six-shot revolver officers have been carrying. The new weapons, which allow officers to fire an extra 10 shots before reloading, were ordered after drug raids frequently resulted in the seizure of Uzi submachine guns and other sophisticated weaponry. Surveying the weapons at a March news conference, Turner called the district's streets ``something out of the Wild, Wild West.'' Officers will have their new guns by 1990. And police have learned that simply arresting more drug suspects hasn't sated the city's appetite for narcotics. A highly-touted anti-drug program, Operation Clean Sweep, has produced more than 46,000 arrests since its August, 1986, inception. However, Turner has complained that the program, which sends swarms of officers through drug-infested neighborhoods to make arrests, has done little more than further clog the city's already-overcrowded jail and court systems. For each drug dealer arrested, another springs forward, according to Turner. ``A lot of these kids are high school dropouts, with few skills,'' Turner said. ``They can make up to a $1 million a year selling drugs. What would you do?'' U.S. Attorney for the District of Columbia Jay B. Stephens, who can prosecute both local and federal crimes, earlier this month announced that he is assigning five senior prosecutors to work solely on drug-related killings in the district. Turner has also called on city officials to spend more money on drug education, prevention and treatment programs. Currently, a three-week wait is common for persons wanting to enroll in the city's treatment centers. What does the future hold? Police hope that as markets are more firmly established for crack, a highly-addictive cocaine derivative, the murder rate will decrease. ``This is one of the last major cities in this country to have an infusion of crack,'' Turner said. ``When crack arrived in other cities, like New York, murder rates went up there too.'' 
The Associated Press reported erroneously on Dec. 29 that Sen. James Sasser, D-Tenn., wrote a letter to the chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, M. Danny Wall, that questioned the bailouts of insolvent savings and loan associations. The letter was written by Sen. Timothy Wirth, D-Colo. 
Revelers rang in 1989 in celebrations ranging from the neon-lit Times Square in New York City to small square-dance halls in Indiana and a mountaintop in Colorado, some with champagne glasses, others promoting abstinence. Millions watched the traditional New Year's countdown on television as the 600-pound wrought-iron ball descended a pole at Times Square. An estimated 600,000 saw the 81-year-old tradition in person. ``We came here because we watched this on TV every year in California, and one day I said, `We've got to go there one of these years,'' said Claudia Zuniga-Mora, 23, of San Diego, who was visiting friends in New Jersey. A 90-minute laser light show in the nation's largest city also was part of the festivities. Many celebrated without such glitz. In Martinsville, Ind., three square dance clubs were to do-si-do until 1 a.m. in the 4-H Building at the Morgan County Fairgrounds. Betty Conover, president of the Flagtown Steppers, said about 200 people were expected. No alcohol was served. ``Square dancers do not drink and dance. You can't drink and listen to the caller,'' Mrs. Conover said. Members of the AdAmAn Club of Colorado Springs, Colo., chose a more solitary setting to toast 1989. They lit a fireworks display from the top of Pikes Peak, elevation 14,100 feet. The group's 66th annual trek culminated at midnight with 60 giant starbursts exploding over the snowcapped peak, where temperatures dipped to about zero and hikers encountered 50 mph winds. ``It was difficult going above tree line where the snow depth reached thigh level,'' said Jim Bates, who made his 34th climb.. Music played a role in many celebrations. At the Grand Ballroom in the New Orleans Sheraton, the music of the Guy Lombardo Orchestra and swing were king. ``We're still playing the music Guy Lombardo played,'' said Kenny Leighton, the leader of the Guy Lombardo Orchestra. ```The sweetest music this side of heaven.' Isn't that corny? But it's true.'' About 1,000 people had plans to dance 1988 away at a black-tie affair at Trump Plaza Hotel &amp; Casino in Atlantic City, N.J. They were to step out to the theme of the Broadway musical ``Phantom of the Opera,'' said Mitchell Etess, a hotel spokesman. A group of New Jersey senior citizens also had partying in mind. Residents at the Jewish Geriatric Home in Cherry Hill planned a New Year's party with the usual activities and even champagne. But the party was scheduled to last only until lights-out at 8 p.m., said spokesman Michael Bucci. An estimated 500,000 people jammed downtown Miami for the 55th Annual King Orange Jamboree Parade to watch flashy floats, bands, 20 circus elephants and television stars such as George Wendt of ``Cheers'' and Susan Ruttan and Raymond Burr of ``LA Law.'' In Boston, about a half million people wandered the city's streets and public gardens as part of 13th annual First Night celebration, which has inspired similar festivals in 23 cities from Denver to Charlotte, N.C. More than 1,000 artists performed across Boston. Many appreciated the event's no-drinking policy. ``We used to go out and misbehave like everyone else on New Year's, but now we come to this as a family,'' said Joyce LaVecchia. ``I mean, why not? And there's no headache in the morning.'' Drinking and driving, again, was an issue across the country. About 1,000 state troopers in New Jersey were on duty to encourage motorists to stay at the 55 mph speed limit and reduce the number of traffic accidents. Anheuser Busch Co. in Newark, N.J., offered free New Year's Eve taxi rides home for about 3,000 drinking revelers in six northern New Jersey counties, officials said. One group also moved to stop a dangerous New Year's Eve tradition in Detroit. Save Our Sons and Daughters, which is made up of relatives and friends of slain Detroit children, asked residents to end the city's New Year's Eve skyward shooting spree. For several years, at midnight, some residents have shot guns in the air. ``It's an insane practice, a part of the mores of this community that needs to stop,'' said Fred Williams, a spokesman for the Detroit Police Department. And in Philadelphia, one group eschewed making resolutions. Instead, they issued predictions _ for last year. The Procastinators Club of America released its 1988 New Year predictions Saturday, as usual when the year is ending. ``Somehow,'' said club president Les Waas added, ``we've never been wrong.'' The club's No. 1 prediction was that George Bush would be elected president and then shoot quail over the Christmas holidays while vacationing in Texas. ``That was a real shot in the dark but it was bull's eye,'' Waas said. 
Illegal fireworks injured hundreds of people and ignited six fires in Manila, leaving thousands of families homeless in the New Year, police and doctors said Sunday. Hospital officials said seven people died from stray bullets and stabbings in New Year's celebrations and brawls in Manila and the city of Cebu, 360 miles southeast of Manila. A check with doctors at 20 government and private hospitals in the capital area showed 1,134 people were injured, mostly by fireworks, late Saturday and early Sunday. ``It's like a war zone here,'' said a government doctor who spoke on condition of anonymity. ``Fingers are being amputated. People are wounded by stray bullets. They are still coming in, and our records are still in shambles from last night.'' Fire raged through one slum neighborhood, killing at least one person and destroying 3,000 makeshift houses, said arson investigator Cpl. Edmar Espresion. Hundreds of houses and apartments also were burned in five other fires in which no casualties were reported, Espresion said. ``All of these fires were started by firecrackers,'' Espression said. In Cebu, the second largest city, at least 86 people, several of them children, were treated in government hospitals for injuries from firecrackers. In Bulacan province, north of Manila, 33 people were injured in frenzied revelry on New Year's Eve, hospital authorities said. The manufacture, sale and use of firecrackers are illegal in the Philippines. But the ban is lightly enforced in a nation where people traditionally explode fireworks to usher in the New Year and celebrate other festivals. On Friday, U.S. serviceman Sgt. Michael Kaleda, 29, of Florida, and a 10-year-old Filipino boy were killed when a homemade firecracker prematurely exploded in the American's house outside Clark Air Base. Four other Filipinos were wounded in the blast. An explosion Thursday at an clandestine firecracker factory in Bulacan province killed 11 people and injured 20. 
A sightseeing cruise boat crowded with New Year's Eve revelers capsized and sank, and at least 42 people drowned, authorities said Sunday. A survivor said foreigners were on board, and Rio morgue officials said they were calling foreign consulates to help identify bodies. The cruise boat, a popular local sightseeing attraction called the Bateau Mouche, was taking people to see a New Year's fireworks display off famous Copacabana Beach. ``We don't know the exact cause of the sinking, but we think it was because of excess capacity,'' said Maj. Oldemiro Santos of the Rio de Janeiro State Fire Department's Maritime Group, who coordinated rescue work. He confirmed the figure of 42 dead and said perhaps 130 people had been on board. Earlier, a radio operator for the Fire Department's Sea Rescue Service said the Bateau Mouche had collided with a private yacht, the Casa Branca. But Santos said the Casa Branca was simply one of many boats that stopped to aid Bateau Mouche victims. Irineu Barroso, the chief of Rio's 10th Police Precinct, with jurisdiction over the bayfront neighborhood closest to the disaster, also said 42 people had drowned. ``It seems there was an excess of passengers, maybe 130 to 150 on board,'' Barroso told The Associated Press. A local radio station said the Bateau Mouche has a capacity of about 100. ``We understand the boat was told to turn back but ignored the order,'' Barroso said. Maj. Santos said the sinking occurred at 11:45 p.m. Saturday (8:45 p.m. EST) ``in very rough seas.'' A Brazilian woman, who said she survived by hanging onto a floating table, told the privately owned Globo TV network she was with a group that included Italians and that there were other foreigners aboard. The woman, whose name was not immediately available, also verified Barroso's statement about the order to turn back. She said Port Authority officals stopped the Bateau Mouche when it already was out on the water, seemed to be counting passengers and made the boat retrun to its bayfront mooring. But then, she said, the cruise boat simply set out again 15 minutes later. The Bateau Mouche makes daily sightseeing cruises across Guanabara Bay, where tourists can admire the mountain scenery that surrounds Rio. The New Year's Eve program, widely advertised in newspapers, was to leave the bay, pass by Sugarloaf Mountain and anchor in the Atlantic Ocean off Copacabana Beach. A fireworks display was set off at the beach at midnight Saturday. Rio's New Year's fireworks show, in the Southern Hemisphere's summer, routinely draws 1 million people to the beach and hundreds of small craft off shore. The Brazilian travel agency that operates the cruise boat, Itatiaia Tourism, did not answer its phone early Sunday. 
An earthen dike broke early Sunday, forcing the evacuation of an estimated 1,500 people for several hours and closure of a major interstate highway, authorities said. Police said the 2,500-foot-long dike, a section of the Quail Creek Dam on the Virgin River about 14 miles east of here, broke eight minutes after midnight. The 50-foot-high dike released a wall of water 10 feet to 12 feet high, said Mike Brunn, a member of the Washington County Search and Rescue Team who watched the water gush through the river channel. ``If you had had a surfboard, you could have just rode the wave. It was that forceful,'' Brunn said. No injuries were reported. Washington County sheriff's deputies reported seeing apparently empty vehicles carried along by the floodwaters, but there were no immediate reports of people missing. Dispatcher Melody Murdock said deputies reported seeing two recreational vehicles and a pickup in the river. St. George City Manager Gary Esplin said ``numerous'' homes were flooded in some of the areas evacuated in the communities of Bloomington, Bloomington Hills, Washington Fields and parts of Washington city. Washington County sheriff's dispatcher Thad Mattson said about daybreak that people were beginning to return to their homes. ``The water pretty well has receded down,'' Mattson said. ``It's headed down the gorge and into the Arizona end of it. Most of the people who have been evacuated are returning.'' Esplin said three bridges in St. George and Washington city were destroyed or rendered useless. St. George Police Chief John Pollei said water was pouring through an ever-widening gap in the dike, which contains Quail Creek Reservoir on the south side. He said the dam itself, which is also earthen and faces southeast, was not damaged. The high water forced the closure of Interstate 15 _ the main route between Salt Lake City and Los Angeles _ south of St. George where the freeway enters the narrow Virgin River Gorge. The break is located about 250 miles south of Salt Lake City. Utah Highway Patrol dispatcher Shirley Iker said there was no water on the road, but travel through the winding gorge was considered hazardous. Mattson said the road would be closed until later in the day when state officials would inspect a bridge running over the Virgin River as a precaution. Iker said the Nevada Highway Patrol had blocked traffic from approaching the gorge from the south, and Arizona authorities had set up roadblocks on side roads that access the passage. The south end of the gorge is in Arizona, a few miles from the Nevada border. The National Weather Service issued a flash-flood warning for areas along the river southward from the dam to the Arizona border. Pollei said the Virgin River Bridge on Utah 9 below the dam was completely under water, severing the highway between the towns of St. George and Hurricane. The cause of the break was not known, he said. A leak was noticed in the dike as early as 10 p.m. Pollei also said he had no precise figure on how many homes had been evacuated. However, local Mormon Church authorities opened their chapels to evacuated families and local Red Cross officials appealed to community residents to open their homes to the displaced. Congested traffic was reported on Utah 9 west of the bridge and on local arteries between Bloomington and St. George as residents attempted to move their families and livestock out of harm's way. Officials said the evacuation effort initially was hampered by the New Year's holiday. Some residents assumed the city's civil defense siren was being sounded to herald the new year. Also, many residents were away from their houses when authorities ordered the evacuation. The flood knocked radio station KSGI off the air. The station's transmission tower was only 50 feet from the river, said news director Jules Dinoff. 
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, who made history in 1979 when she became Europe's first woman prime minister, noted Sunday she is not alone and joked that male politicians may one day come back into fashion. ``We're getting more women prime ministers,'' she said in a television interview, referring to the recent election of Benazir Bhutto as prime minister of Pakistan. ``And don't forget ... Mrs. Gandhi was a very able, charming, formidable prime minister of India.'' Mrs. Thatcher now is the longest serving leader in the West. Before she came to power, women had governed in Sri Lanka and Israel. Part of the British leader's tenure in office coincided with that of Mrs. Gandhi, who was assassinated in 1984. ``I think male prime ministers one day will come back into fashion,'' she joked with interviewer David Frost on Britain's commercial TV-am channel. Asked about combining her job and her domestic life with her husband, Denis, a retired oil executive, she said ``women have run both the home and work for a very long time.'' ``I mean, every working wife knows that if you decide to have steak and kidney pie for supper, it's no better if you took 20 minutes thinking about it than if you took 20 seconds.'' Frost recalled Mrs. Thatcher's comment ``I never did understand men,'' during an acrimonious meeting last year with fellow leaders of the European Economic Community. Asked if she understood men better now, Mrs. Thatcher replied: ``It may not be understanding of the deepest kind, but I do know what they're likely to do and say. So, one has a certain predictability about it.'' 
Hundreds of Tibetan students demonstrated in Lhasa, demanding that Chinese authorities respect their culture and stop carrying weapons, Western witnesses said Sunday. During the march, Tibetans beat five police officers who tried to stop two Americans and one German from taking photographs, witnesses said. Two of the Chinese police were hospitalized, they said. The demonstration, which occurred Friday in the capital of the remote Himalayan region, was the first known protest led by students from Tibet University. Buddhist monks have led other protests during the past 15 months. After the incident, the Americans and the German, all men, were detained for an hour at the Public Security Bureau, Western tourists said. Chinese fined the two Americans $27 each and confiscated their film, they said. A Lhasa city ordinance prohibits foreigners from taking photographs of demonstrations. An English tourist, contacted by telephone from Beijing, said the march began at the Potala temple, one of Tibetan Buddhism's holiest shrines. The demonstrators were carrying banners in Tibetan and Chinese, asking for less restriction on the study of the Tibetan and more respect for Tibetan culture and religion, he said. China in the past, particularly during the leftist 1966-76 Cultural Revolution, suppressed Tibetan culture and language, but in recent years have pledged to respect Tibetan heritage. Another banner requested that all Chinese in Tibet stop carrying firearms and treat Tibetans peacefully, he said. It referred to a pro-independence demonstration on Dec. 10 when at least two Tibetans, including a monk and a child, were killed in Lhasa. A Dutch woman was among the 13 people wounded in the protest. At least 38 people were killed during anti-Chinese demonstrations in March 1988 and in October 1987. Tibetans activists seek independence from China's 38-year rule. China claims Tibet has belonged to Beijing since the 13th century. Tibet's spiritual and temporal leader, the Dalai Lama, fled Lhasa in 1959 and sought refuge in India after an aborted anti-Chinese uprising. An American said the marchers walked down the city's main road and around the city, passing several hotels frequented by foreign tourists. The protest ended an hour later at Tibet University. 
India will start pulling its peacekeeping troops out of Sri Lanka this week at the request of President-elect Ranasinghe Premadasa, the Indian government announced Sunday. Premadasa, who takes office Monday, promised during the election campaign to send the Indian soldiers home. India sent an estimated 50,000 troops to the Indian Ocean island in July 1987, hours after an accord was signed to end an insurgency by Tamil rebels demanding a separate homeland in the north and east provinces. India will withdraw two battalions in the next few days, the Indian High Commission, or embassy, in Colombo announced at a news conference. ``I cannot give you the mathematics of how many troops will be involved but from what I know, from 2,000 to 3,000 troops, making up two brigades, will be withdrawn, said H.M. Dixit, the Indian high commissioner. Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi and Sri Lanka's outgoing president, Junius R. Jayewardene, discussed the withdrawal Saturday during a summit of seven South Asian countries in Islamabad, Pakistan, Dixit said. Opponents of the peace accord had feared Indian troops sent to the island to disarm the Tamil rebels and enforce a cease-fire might remain on the island indefinitely. ``The withdrawal is being done because we respect the public sentiments in Sri Lanka, and this is sincere declaration that we have no intention of staying permanently in Sri Lanka,'' Dixit said. India, the regional power, got involved in the conflict because 60 million Tamils living in southern India are sympathetic to the rebels' cause. More than 626 Indian soldiers have died while trying to enforce the agreement. Tamils, like the Indians, are mostly Hindus. They make up 18 percent of the island's 16 million people. Tamils have long accused the predominantly Buddhist Sinhalese of denying them jobs, education and money for development. The Sinhalese, who make up 75 percent of the country's population, control the government and the military. Militant Tamils have been demanding an independent nation in the north and east provinces, where Tamils concentrate. They have rejected the government's offer of limited autonomy if they surrender their weapons and end the 5-year-old guerrilla war that has left more than 8,500 people dead. The accord also enraged Sinhalese radicals, who contend it grants too many concessions to the Tamils and brought Indian troops across the narrow 18-mile Palk Straits to Sri Lankan soil. Militants have been blamed for the deaths of more than 900 people, most supporters of the agreement. But Dixit said that during the last few months the ``process of normalization has commenced ... And matters can be resolved in a reasonable and amicable way.'' ``As the situation improves further, as the devolution of powers becomes effective. As the Indo-Sri Lanka agreement gets progressively implemented, and as the mischief-making potential of extremist elements opposed to the agreement is reduced, the government is hopeful of making further withdrawals,'' Dixit said. 
Israeli soldiers with powerful binoculars peer into the rocky expanse of southern Lebanon after warnings that Palestinian guerrillas opposed to the PLO's peace overtures may try to infiltrate Israel. Armed Palestinians have approached the barbed wire fence along the border twice, on Dec. 26 and Dec. 28, and six of them were killed by Israeli soldiers. Several rockets were fired into the region from Lebanon on Friday. Army officials say they believe radical factions of the Palestine Liberation Organization may step up their attempts to infiltrate and attack Israeli civilians to sabotage the PLO's movement toward negotiation after PLO chairman Yasser Arafat recognized Israel. Maj. Gadi, commander of a battalion stationed in this northern village, sees another new danger in a peace treaty signed in Beirut lass than two weeks ago by the PLO and Amal, the Lebanese Shiite Moslem militia. ``The Amal are acting as guides and bringing the terrorists up to the border,'' says Gadi, whose last name cannot be used under army regulations. To 25-year-old Capt. Yossi and other soldiers, all infiltrators are terrorists whose purpose is to attack civilian settlements, many of them collective farms that grow apples. There have been more than 20 major attempts to sneak into Israel from Lebanon this year, some of them by sea. Battles between infiltrators and Israeli troops have claimed the lives of five soldiers and more than 25 guerrillas. In the more than two months Gadi's soldiers have been stationed in Avivim, they have fought two battles with Lebanese guerrillas. Three guerrillas were killed, Gadi said, but ``we are lucky there are no casualties on our side.'' The three infiltrators carried Soviet-designed Kalashnikov rifles, grenades and rocket-propelled launchers. In the border sector next to Gadi's, Israeli soldiers escaped injury in two recent battles with Palestinian guerrillas. Army officials say the guerrillas' target was Kibbutz Manara, a collective farm visible from a hilltop lookout post near Avivim. Gadi, who at 29 has served 11 years in the army, says 23 civilian settlements lie in the 12-mile border strip under his command. Israel's elaborate border defenses against guerrilla attacks includes a security zone on the Lebanese side patrolled by Israeli soldiers and an Israeli-backed Christian militia in Lebanon. Near Avivim, the zone stretches from 1{ miles to seven miles north of the border. Mines are buried just inside Lebanon, and rusting rolls of concertina barbed wire are strung along both sides of the border. Touching the electronic border fence sets off alarms that army officers say can indicate to within about 100 yards where the trouble is. On the Israeli side, a road is patrolled by Israeli trucks and a dusty strip is swept frequently so that any footprints can be detected. Still, says Yossi, both Palestinian and Lebanese Shiite guerrillas keep trying to penetrate the barrier. ``It takes only five minutes to cut the fence,'' he says. Yossi says the infiltrators' trick is to try to sneak up as close as possible during the day, then cut through the fence at night. ``There are teen-agers sent into the border who don't stand a chance,'' he noted. The army says Palestinian guerrillas have carried leaflets saying they want to take civilian hostages to trade for colleagues jailed in Israel. Claims of responsibility often call for liberating Arab land lost with the creation of Israel in 1948. About 300 yards from the border, an Israeli collective farm called Kibbutz Malkiyya is protected by a soldier at the gate, a nearby army lookout post and rolls of concertina wire. Across the fence, Lebanese farmers can be seen tending fields neatly divided by stones and herding sheep. Arab villages sit on hilltops in the distance. ``It's green and nice until the shooting starts,'' says Gadi. 
Defense lawyers deride them as ``snitches,'' ``swine,'' and ``creeps,'' an underworld of jailhouse informants who curry favor with prosecutors and win rewards for incriminating testimony. Now, a disclosure by one informant of how easily a prisoner can frame someone with bogus testimony has exploded into scandal for the nation's largest district attorney's office. Though prosecutors say only a tiny fraction of cases involve jailhouse informants, they are reviewing more than 130 cases of the past decade for possible taint by lying informants. Among the convictions being reviewed are such high-profile prosecutions as those of the so-called Hillside Strangler, Angelo Buono; the Freeway Killer, William Bonin; and Skid Row Slasher Bobby Joe Maxwell. Also under scrutiny is the ongoing McMartin preschool molestation trial in which an informant was a key witness against defendant Raymond Buckey. The district attorney's office also is re-evaluating its policy on use of jailhouse informants as witnesses. And two attorney groups have asked the grand jury to appoint a special prosecutor to investigate the situation. ``It's a corruption of the system. ...,'' said Leslie Abramson, president of California Attorneys for Criminal Justice. ``They (prosecutors) shouldn't be using these people because they should know that they're lying.'' Assistant District Attorney Curt Livesay, third-ranking official in the office, said most prosecutors abhor the use of informants, but they provide valuable information. ``Jailhouse informants are liars, thieves, murderers, criminals. They would put their mothers in prison in their stead if they could,'' he said. ``But they help us solve crimes we wouldn't otherwise solve.'' The incident that spurred the debate in Los Angeles' legal community involves Leslie White, a repeat offender and longtime informant who frequently testified against other prisoners. In return, he said, he received furloughs from prison, a recommendation for parole, a reduction of bail and $1,800 from ``a witness protection fund'' as well as $900 for his wife's relocation. Then, in October, White demonstrated to authorities that by using a jail telephone and posing as a bail bondsman, a prosecutor or police detective, he could gather enough information about a murder case to concoct a confession by a defendant he had never met. A defense lawyer who heard of the demonstration took the story to the media and White became a cause celebre. He admitted he had committed perjury in more than one case and suggested that some men may have gone to Death Row partly because of informants' false testimony. With his newfound celebrity status, the 31-year-old White reportedly has hired an agent to represent him for book and movie deals. The district attorney's office has been under fire since White's disclosures. District Attorney Ira Reiner, who heads an 800-prosecutor agency, promised an investigation that would be ``one of the most thoroughgoing and most forthcoming inquiries that any department has ever made.'' He also defended the use of informants, saying: ``Informants tell us where the body is buried. They tell us where the gun that was used in the killing can be found. ... You can't turn the other ear, nor should you responsibly turn the other way.'' Attorney Robert Berke, who filed a lengthy brief for California Attorneys for Criminal Justice in its campaign for a special prosecutor, says Los Angeles County has paid hundreds of thousands of dollars to jailhouse informants, which may constitute malfeasance by public officials. Prosecutors generally describe any payments as expenses, to relocate people who are leaving jail for example. ``When incentives like this are available to people under sentence in jail, desperate people, you get unreliable testimony,'' said Berke. Attorney Gigi Gordon, head of the Los Angeles Criminal Courts Bar Association's Informant Investigation Committee, equated such payments to bribery. ``Where did anyone get the idea that they have to give an informant anything?'' she asked. ``The real tragedy,'' said Ms. Abramson, ``is that they only use these guys in cases where the evidence is weak. So they are increasing the risk of convicting the innocent.'' Livesay said the number of cases in which informants testify make up little more than 1 percent of the total felonies filed by his office each year, and agreed that the cases are often the weaker ones. ``There's not a public prosecutor in the world who wants to call a jailhouse informant as a witness,'' he said. ``It detracts from the case. Typically, they're called when you have a case with a hole in it.'' But the prosecutor expressed skepticism about the role of defense attorneys, saying they sometimes offer to have their own clients turn informant. ``While we have defense attorneys lamenting the use of jailhouse informants, when the informant is their client, they're the first ones in our office,'' he said. ``That's the most despicable thing I've ever heard,'' Ms. Abramson responded. ``When you run around offering immunity to murderers, you have no right to get on a moral high horse. ``My clients are not informants. I do not represent professional snitches.'' 
North Korean President Kim Il Sung on Sunday invited his South Korean counterpart, Roh Tae-woo, and six other political and religious leaders to a political conference, official North Korean media reported. The Korean Central News Agency, monitored in Tokyo, said Kim proposed a ``political consultative meeting of leadership-level people from the North and South'' to discuss the reunification of Korea. Kim made the proposal in a New Year's speech. He did not name Roh, but extended the invitation to the head of the governing Democratic Justice Party, the agency said. Kim said the meeting also should be attended by the leaders of the three main South Korean opposition parties: the Party for Peace and Democracy, the Reunification Democratic Party and the New Democratic Republican Party. The three parties are led, respectively, by Kim Dae-jung, Kim Young-sam and Kim Jong-pil. Kim also invited Cardinal Kim Su-hwan, the leader of South Korea's Roman Catholic Church; the Rev. Mun Ik-hwan and Mr. Paek Ki-wan, the leaders of a popular movement that has played a prominent role in past struggles against authoritarian governments. Korea was divided into North Korea and South Korea in 1945, when Soviet and U.S. troops ended Japan's colonial rule over the peninsula at the end of World War II. Communist North Korea invaded the South in 1950 to begin the three-year Korean War. In recent months, the two Koreas have traded new proposals for dialogue, and lawmakers from the two sides have met in a series of talks, the latest on Thursday in the border village of Panmunjom. North Korea also has called for political and military talks on arms reductions and other tension-easing measures. It also has called for three-way talks among the two Koreas and the United States, which has 42,000 troops stationed in South Korea. Kim Il Sung's message called for an end to the annual U.S.-South Korean military exercises, called ``Team Spirit.'' The joint exercises held each spring are in preparation for a possible North Korean invasion. ``If the South Korean authorities are ready to bring about a new turn in their policy in response to these endeavors of ours, they should, at least, clearly express their attitude not to stage the ... joint military exercises this year,'' Kim said. South Korea says the exercises are defensive maneuvers, but North Korea maintains that they are a threat to its security. The North last week made a halt to the joint exercises a condition for progress in the lawmakers' talks. 
An Eritrean rebel group that has waged Africa's longest civil war has agreed to negotiate with the Ethiopian government for an end to the 26-year-old rebellion, a Sudanese newspaper reported Sunday. Omar Reyh, chairman of the Eritrean Liberation Front-Unified Organization, said Sudan proposed the talks after a recent visit to Khartoum by an Ethiopian delegation, the Al-Siyassa newspaper reported. The newspaper quoted Reyh as saying he met Saturday with Sudanese Prime Minister Sadek Mahdi, who suggested Sudan as the site for the negotiations. ``Sudan proposed that there be a preparatory meeting between the Eritrean and Ethiopian sides to prepare for an official negotiating delegation,'' the rebel leader was quoted as saying. ``We have accepted this proposal.'' There was no immediate word from Addis Ababa, the Ethiopian capital, about the Marxist government's position on the proposal. The governments of Sudan and Ethiopia often have exchanged charges of harboring each other's rebels, but relations have improved recently. Three factions of the Eritrean Liberation Front _ which have been fighting 26 years for independence of their northern Ethiopian region _ joined forces on Jan. 23, 1985, as the Eritrean Liberation Front-Unified Organization. The Eritrean revolt, exacerbated by famine, has forced about 850,000 Ethiopians across the border into Sudan in search of safety. 
In the year since an oil spill fouled two rivers and threatened drinking water in three states, the company responsible has been indicted, inspectors have been fired and new laws proposed. And still in question is the long-term environmental damage of the spill that killed millions of fish in parts of the Monongahela and Ohio rivers. ``We have had a major change in the river that has to be studied and watched. These are of grave concern,'' said Tom Proch, fish biologist with the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources. But Dr. Edgar Berkey of the Center for Hazardous Materials Research at the University of Pittsburgh, who supervised a $750,000 study funded by Ashland Oil Inc., said the most significant effects of the spill occurred ``over the short term, and these are largely past.'' Last Jan. 2, a rebuilt Ashland Oil storage tank holding more than 3.8 million gallons of diesel fuel collapsed at the company's terminal 25 miles south of Pittsburgh. A tidal wave of 705,000 gallons of oil surged into the Monongahela, which was swollen and swift from heavy rains. Emergency workers recovered about 30 percent of the fuel. But most of the oil entered the Ohio River at downtown Pittsburgh and kept moving into Ohio and West Virginia, threatening drinking water supplies for millions of people. About 23,000 suburban Pittsburgh residents lost tap water for nearly a week until the heaviest pollution passed their water companies' intakes, and several businesses and schools were closed for a few days. An apologetic Ashland Oil took the blame and paid the bills. It agreed to clean up the soil and ground water at the terminal, inspect its 150 facilities nationwide and pay damage claims associated with the spill. The Ashland, Ky.-based company so far has paid $17 million, or about 80 percent of 6,000 claims, said Ashland spokesman Roger Schrum. But the company's contrition didn't spare it from criminal charges, particularly after engineers determined a dime-sized flaw in the steel wall of the oil tank caused its collapse and a state task force concluded Ashland was negligent. On Sept. 15, a federal grand jury indicted Ashland on two misdemeanor counts for allegedly violating the federal Clean Water and Refuse acts, and a state investigation is still under way. Ashland reacted bitterly to the charges and produced a 1986 memo from the Allegheny County fire marshal's office confirming the company's claim that it had approval to begin construction of the rebuilt tank. County officials had long denied that any permission was given. Three people in the fire marshal's office, including the chief, resigned or were fired over what their superiors called shoddy work practices. Meanwhile, a flurry of federal and state legislation pertaining to above-ground storage tanks has been proposed, but nothing has been enacted. Rep. Doug Walgren, a Pennsylvania Democrat, said he plans to reintroduce his bill to regulate aboveground storage tanks when Congress returns this month. The spill killed roughly 2,000 ducks nesting along the rivers in Pennsylvania and injured others. Few ducklings hatched in the spring. It is believed the kill in Pennsylvania was limited to about 11,000 fish. But downriver in West Virginia, about 3 million dead fish were counted, a state report said. The higher count in West Virginia is believed to be due to a slower current and the oil mixing with sediments and sinking to the river bottom, where fish feed in the winter, explained Berkey. Berkey said heavy rains that began around Jan. 19 dispersed the oil deposited on the river bottom, preventing similar problems downriver. ``The rain pretty much cleaned the system,'' he said. ``The bulk of the spill is south of New Orleans by now ... but in such diluted quantities that it would be difficult to identify.'' Despite the kill, Proch said fishing in the Ohio, Monongahela and Allegheny rivers this year was reported to be good. A major cause for concern, however, is an apparent decline of minnows, a key food for game fish. But Berkey said there have been extreme fluctuations in the minnow population in the past decade for reasons not known. He agreed that additional studies should be conducted. Alan Vicory, director of the Cincinnati-based Ohio River Valley Water Sanitation Commission, said he does not believe the rivers pose a health risk to humans. ``But I certainly think there is a question about the long-term impacts,'' he said. 
A missing teen whom sheriffs stopped looking for because they considered him a runaway was found hungry and disoriented in a national forest where he had been lost and wandering for six days. Andrew Campbell, 15, was found with frost-bitten hands and toes in an oak grove of Cleveland National Forest by a father and son out for a drive. Campbell's parents were in another part of the forest, still searching for their son who had gotten lost returning from a fishing trip Dec. 24. ``How can you give up when it's your own son? You just can't,'' said Leonard Campbell, the boy's stepfather, who expressed anger at authorities for giving up on the boy. Campbell was listed in fair condition Sunday at Sharp Memorial Hospital, where he was taken Friday by ambulance following his rescue. ``He looks pretty sunken, like he needs to have some food,'' Pauline Renner, a hospital spokeswoman, had said Saturday. ``But aside from that, he's pretty alert and with it.'' Renner said the boy had frostbitten feet and toes. Nighttime temperatures dipped into the 20s for several days while the boy was missing, according to weather forecasters. A staff nurse who refused to give her name said Campbell was transferred out of the hospital's intensive care unit Saturday morning and into a general-care ward. The nurse said the family requested no other information be released. Authorities abandoned the search for Campbell on Tuesday after dogs trailing his scent lost it near a roadside. Despite his parents' protests, sheriff's officials said they believed Campbell, who once ran away from home, hitched a ride out of the forest and was safe. The boy initially was listed as a runaway when his mother, Debbie Campbell, reported to the Sheriff's Department that he was missing. The department changed his status when his parents complained about the runaway designation. At the hospital Friday, Leonard Campbell said he was upset over the sheriff's department's decision to end the search. ``They have their political situation over there and they have things they have to do,'' he said. A statement issued Saturday by the Sheriff's Department said officials will review how the search was handled for Campbell. Volunteer search and rescue units used horses and dogs to look for the teen-ager, until the hunt was called off. The department ``will continue to retrace his tracks to determine how he became lost,'' the statement said. Campbell was rescued by Bill Orsborn, 60, a retired firefighter from La Mesa, and his son, Mark, 29. ``He was just off under some oak trees wandering around,'' Bill Orsborn said Friday night. ``He was disoriented. He didn't know where he was, how long he was out there or what day it was.'' The boy told the Orsborns he survived by eating snow and fish he caught but said little else about the ordeal. Campbell was reunited with his mother and stepfather soon after he was found. As the Orsborns drove him out of the forest, young Campbell recognized the family car in a parking area. The parents were nearby searching for the boy. Campbell said the boy survived because he was resourceful and had warm clothing. ``What saved him was his field jacket because it had a hood on it and he was able to pull it up around his head to keep himself warm,'' he said.  
Lucille Hollingsworth House decided about 30 years ago to start collecting, rather than throwing out, anything she could find ``that was old-looking.'' Now, after three decades of bringing home everything from gravy boats to photographs of the Apollo lunar landings, the 79-year-old Mrs. House has what surely must be west Alabama's finest collection of, well, stuff. It's all contained in and around Ma'Cille's Museum of Miscellania. The key word there is ``miscellania,'' as in a serving platter shaped like a fish or the barbed-wire fence exhibit in the rambling, wooden-frame museum adjoining Mrs. House's rural home. The only real advertising Mrs. House does is located along a two-lane highway near Gordo, about 20 miles east of the Mississippi line. A faded sign points down the road toward her home, and another placard at the house lets the curious know they have arrived. Mrs. House says she is still collecting things, but there is one problem. Ma'Cille's museum is getting crowded. On top of the building's tin roof are hundreds _ maybe thousands _ of bottles. An old newspaper clipping about the museum said the bottles are up there so the sun can clean them. Mrs. House has a simpler explanation: ``I ran out of places to put them.'' 
Some children giggle as they sidle up to the judge's bench to adopt their teddy bears, GI Joes and baby dolls, but they mean every word of their pledges to be good parents. ``The kids come in and I place them under oath, ask them a few questions and issue a certificate,'' said Clark Superior Court Judge George A. Jacobs, who conducts the annual adoption proceedings for new Christmas toys. ``It's a fun thing for the kids, but it also has a positive side. We think it gives a good impression. It shows them that the law is here to help, not hurt, them,'' said Jacobs, 42. Fifty-two children from this southeastern Indiana community trekked to the courtroom on Saturday to become part of the tradition Jacobs began in 1984, when Cabbage Patch dolls complete with their own adoption papers were popular. That year, 700 children participated. Since then, Jacobs has performed 50 to 150 adoptions each year. Some of the children are themselves adopted, brought to the ceremony by their parents to show them what an adoption is like. The adopted toys tend to become permanent playthings, Jacobs said. Instead of losing their luster as the Christmas charm fades, the toys ``become special, have a new lasting importance.'' 
Gunmen killed a 27-year-old man and wounded a policeman after officers confronted a group painting anti-government slogans on a wall, the dead man's father said Sunday. Police in the northern city of Arica said by telephone that the incident occurred Saturday night but refused to provide details. A police spokesman said an official report will be issued, probably Monday. A Santiago radio station, Radio Chilena, called the gunmen ``unidentified civilians,'' an expression often used to refer to members of the National Information Agency, the military regime's secret police. Omar Cautivo said his son, Salvador, a worker at a local chemical plant, was shot dead and that a police officer was wounded. Cautivo said his son with with a group of friends painting anti-government slogans on a wall in a suburb of Arica, 1,250 miles north of Santiago. A police patrol appeared and ordered the group to stop, Cautivo said. A group of civilians watching the scene a few yards away opened fire with automatic weapons, killing Salvador and wounding one officer, Cautivo said. The man said police later arrested two daughters of his, one of them at the local hospital where she went to find out about her brother. The independent Human Rights Commission in Arica, which normally reports on this type of incidents, was closed on Sunday because of New Year's. 
The judge in the PTL bankruptcy case called for stricter scrutiny of religious groups in newspaper interviews in which he described former PTL leader Jim Bakker as a ``little, sawed-off runt.'' Rufus Reynolds, who retired Saturday as a U.S. bankruptcy judge, told the Greensboro News &amp; Record that television ministries are ``wide open'' for mismanagement or corruption. He also said he received death threats while he was handling the case. ``I think Congress should pass a very strong act forcing the IRS (Internal Revenue Service) ... to make them comply with an accounting,'' Reynolds said. ``We have all kinds of laws protecting consumers. Religion is just another consumer item, just the same as selling soap or washing powders or aspirin.'' In a separate interview with The Charlotte Observer, the 81-year-old Reynolds said he was amazed at the response to the travails that brought down Bakker's evangelistic empire. ``What puzzled me was why people were interested in that little, sawed-off runt,'' Reynolds said. The PTL founder Sunday criticized the judge's comments. ``I am shocked to find Judge Reynolds so prejudiced toward us, and to hear of him making fun of us and the PTL partners,'' Bakker said in a statement released by one of his attorneys. ``He should not have tried the PTL case with these feelings against us.'' The interviews were published Sunday, the day after Reynolds' tenure in the bankruptcy case ended with his retirement. The ministry filed for protection under federal bankruptcy laws in June 1987, three months after Bakker resigned from PTL amid a sex-and-money scandal. Two months ago, Reynolds ordered Bakker, his wife, Tammy, and former aide David Taggart to repay PTL nearly $7.7 million in benefits he found to be excessive. Last month, he approved the sale of PTL assets to a Canadian businessman. It was also last month that a federal grand jury indicted Bakker and former top aide Richard Dortch on criminal fraud and conspiracy charges, accusing them of diverting more than $4 million in PTL money for their own benefit. Bakker is scheduled to appear in U.S. District Court in Charlotte on Jan. 17. Upon his retirement, Reynolds told the Observer that he left the PTL case discouraged and somewhat cynical. For the first time as a bankruptcy judge, Reynolds was guarded by U.S. marshals. He said the FBI investigated death threats. ``I didn't know Christians could be so critical. They would just chew me out,'' Reynolds said. When a woman called the bankruptcy court in Columbia to find out if he was a Christian, ``I said, `You tell her I was when I started this case, but now I plead the Fifth Amendment.''' In talking with the News &amp; Record, Reynolds said he would like to see closer government regulation of all not-for-profit corporations, including churches. ``They're handling (money) the way they damn please. They mold a religion to fit their pocketbook,'' Reynolds said. He dismissed arguments that stricter regulation of broadcast ministries might violate First Amendment guarantees of freedom of speech and worship. ``The First Amendment has no relation to accounting for money,'' Reynolds said. ``When you go stealing other people's money, you can't say, `The Bible excuses me. I've been forgiven by the Lord.' That doesn't apply.'' 
It may not be everyone's idea of a good time, especially coming on the heels of New Year's Eve, but the 49 men and women who plunged into the icy waters of Boston Harbor on Sunday seemed to enjoy themselves. To keep up the 85-year tradition of the L Street Brownies swimming club, men and women ranging in age from teen-agers to octogenarians took the yearly New Year's morning dip in the harbor. Before they ran down the strip of beach into the water, club president Paul Levenson apologized to onlookers for ``the mild weather over which we have no control.'' It was 25 degrees outside. ``Not bad,'' said Al Binari, 55, of Somerville, as he exited the 29-degree water wearing nothing more than a brief pair of swimming trunks. ``It was great!'' said Frances Tobin, who appeared to be in her 50s and said it was her first winter swim. ``I said I was going to do it and I did it.'' Many of the swimmers are longtime members of the L Street Brownies, a swimming club which has its headquarters at the L Street Bathhouse in South Boston. Many, like George Graney, 75, Jerry Collins, 82, and Joe Alecks, 77, have been swimming year-round for decades. ``We do it for health reasons,'' said Graney. ``It's a discipline. We do it every day, like joggers. Some days we have to chop the ice away before we go in.'' ``They do it for their sex lives,'' retorted Paul Wolan, 78, who stopped swimming year-round recently but still takes daily dips from March until November. One of the younger club members, Peter Jurzynski, 37, scoffed at questions about the cleanliness of Boston Harbor, which was an issue in last year's presidential campaign. ``The yuppies go to the Caribbean; we have the crystal clear waters of Boston Harbor,'' Jurzynski said. The group clustered together for a photograph before the swim, several wearing New Year's Eve hats and others reluctant to discard their shirts and sweatpants until the last minute. Collins, who said he's been swimming on New Year's Day since 1925, walked out of the water smiling. ``Really refreshing,'' he said. 
A bespectacled language professor says no one got his side of the story before mistakenly arresting him because of a note he found that threatened to blow up an American Airlines jetliner. Now that his ordeal is over, Peter M. Canning, 40, said at a news conference Saturday, he's headed for a job interview at Yale University. He was on his way Tuesday to a New Orleans convention, where he hoped to have several job interviews, when a stewardess mistakenly thought a note Canning found in his tray-table was a bomb threat written by him. ``I thought it was a nightmare at first. It occurred to me that I might wake up,'' said Canning, a lecturer at the University of California at Berkeley. He said he hasn't decided whether to sue anyone over the false charge of making a bomb threat Tuesday aboard flight 240 from San Francisco to Dallas. He was arrested in Albuquerque, N.M., where the plane made an emergency landing. Charges were dropped Thursday, after an 11-year-old boy admitted he wrote the note and left it on the plane. The boy took the flight just before Canning's and had sat in the same seat as Canning. When the dropping of the charges was announced, Jim Nelson, the FBI's top agent in New Mexico, said he regretted ``any inconvenience or embarrassment suffered by Mr. Canning'' but said the arrest was justified based on what agents knew at the time. Canning's attorney in Albuquerque, Ray Twohig, said he has advised Canning to wait a week or so before deciding what action to take. Canning, in his first statement since charges were dropped, told how he handed the note to a flight attendant after it fell into his lap from a fold-out tray after lunch. ``Part of the note said, `There is bombs planted all over this airplane.' ... Two minutes into reading this, I thought it was placed there as a prank,'' said Canning, a slightly built man who wore tinted glasses, jeans and a wool sports coat. He told reporters he gave the crumpled, two-page note to a flight attendant, who walked to the front of the plane. ``Thirty seconds later she returned and said `Is this your note?' and I said `No, it is not.' But before I could say anything else, she spun on her heels _ she was understandably nervous _ but no one ever came back to ask me for an explanation,'' he said. The plane was diverted to Albuquerque, where Canning was questioned by the FBI for two hours and arrested. Later, authorities asked him to supply several handwriting samples. ``I didn't start panicking, I started getting angry,'' said Canning. He was arraigned in federal court in New Mexico and released on his own recognizance. He learned that the charges had been dropped while driving back to Berkeley in a rental car Friday night because no airline would book him a seat. He had stopped at a restaurant near the California-Arizona border and saw a newspaper headline. ``I'm now relieved, as you can imagine,'' Canning said. Before the incident, Canning was en route to the convention of the Modern Language Association in New Orleans, where the Harvard doctoral candidate hoped to attend several job interviews. Faculty members at Yale agreed to reschedule his interview, he said, adding that it was too soon to tell whether missing several other interviews will hurt his career. 
Organizers hoping to herd 10,000 head of cattle through south-central Montana to celebrate the state's centennial are facing problems never dreamed of by cowboys of 100 years ago. For one thing, no one in 1889 had to worry about a water quality permit. For another, they are planning to move an unusually large number of cattle. But organizers say they're not deterred by questions of environmental impact or such cowboy insider worries as whether the cattle will balk when driven toward a river crossing at midday. The problems will be overcome, they say, and the six-day drive will come off Sept. 4 through 9, one of a year-long series of events celebrating Montana's admission to the Union on Nov. 8, 1889. Interest in the drive spans several continents, according to Jim Wempner, a Billings-area rancher and director of the event. However, only 700 people so far have indicated they will participate, he said. Wempner did not know how many cattle that included, but said each person must consign at least one animal. He said he expects the drive to involve 200 wagons and 5,000 cowboys, including 100 experienced trail hands. ``It's going to happen,'' Wempner said, despite numerous obstacles stemming from a state-level review of the drive's potential environmental impact. ``We do the same thing for 2,000 cattle as we would with 10,000 cattle,'' he said. ``There's not that much of a difference. This is just a larger number.'' Organizers bill it as one of the largest cattle drives in history. But state officials have questioned whether the sponsors will be able to overcome problems, including the handling of wastes created by people and livestock along the 58-mile route between Roundup and Billings. Outgoing Lt. Gov. Gordon McOmber, chairman of the state Centennial Commission, said experienced cattlemen also have criticized the plan. He said they cite behavioral quirks of cattle that could lead to problems, such as a possibility the animals might refuse to cross a river during the heat of the day. The angle of the sun may make it impossible for the cattle to see the bottom, causing them to balk. ``Those things are long forgotten in this day and age,'' McOmber said. Organizers need permits and water quality variances to allow cattle to cross rivers and streams and possibly air quality variances if cattle are moved along dusty dirt roads, officials said. People from across the United States and two from Australia have applied to participate, Wempner said, adding that filmmakers from West Germany, France and Switzerland have shown interest in documenting the event. Wempner estimated it would cost $500,000 to stage the drive. Among the other events planned for the centennial is a 250-mile wagon train trek being organized by the Montana Draft Horse and Mule Association. More than 80 wagons, 17 riding groups, 367 horses and 301 people are registered and about a half-dozen others are on a waiting list for the trip, planned for June and July. 
House Republican Leader Bob Michel said Sunday a tax increase probably will be part of a bipartisan budget compromise in 1989 despite President-elect Bush's pledge to oppose higher taxes. The Illinois Republican, two days before the new congressional session, said he does not believe there is enough room to cut spending to meet deficit-reduction targets. ``I don't know that there is that much flexibility,'' Michel said. ``When I served on the budget summit the last time around, we found we had to take a measure of that (tax increases). I suspect that down the road a piece that may be part of the answer.'' But Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole, R-Kan., said he takes Bush's opposition to more taxes at face value. ``My view is the same as the president-elect, George Bush,'' Dole said. ``I didn't coin the phrase, `read my lips.' But I think he means it. And I don't see any give in that area at this point.'' Bush repeatedly stressed his opposition to taxes during the presidential campaign by urging any doubters to ``read my lips.'' Michel and Dole were interviewed on ABC's ``This Week With David Brinkley'' along with House Majority leader Tom Foley, D-Wash., and Senate Majority leader George Mitchell, D-Maine. The 101st Congress convenes Tuesday for a swearing-in, with committee hearings on Republican Cabinet appointees among the first order of business prior to the Jan. 20 inauguration. The congressional leaders expressed agreement that Bush should make the first move in proposing answers. ``The president-elect should go first,'' Dole said ``We know we're going to have to face it. My own view is it (a compromise) will come together.'' Michel, Foley and Mitchell, questioned about the upcoming trial of former White House aide Oliver North on charges stemming from the Iran-Contra affair, agreed a sitting president should not be forced to appear in court to give testimony. North's lawyers on Friday subpoenaed both President Reagan and Bush to testify as defense witnesses at the trial. ``There are ways a president can become a part'' of a trial, said Foley. ``But his actual appearance in court is discouraged.'' The House members suggested a statement by Reagan or Bush given out of court might be satisfactory. Mitchell said ``there is a strong presumption'' against requiring a president to testify. But Mitchell said Reagan's legal protection against appearing in court may be reduced after he leaves office on Jan. 20. Mitchell also challenged the idea that Reagan's testimony would be helpful to North. The senator said North testified during congressional hearings that he acted without Reagan's knowledge in funneling proceeds from Iran arms sales to the Nicaraguan rebels. Mitchell also said it would be improper for Reagan to be pressured into pardoning North because of the possibility the president could be required to testify. Any special treatment for North would support the idea there are ``two standards of justice'' for government officials and everyone else, Mitchell said. 
Two men investigating a house burglary on their own used a gun to deliver a teen-age ``suspect'' to police, but it was the two men who ended up charged in the incident, police said Sunday. ``You can't be your own vigilante,'' said Police Lt. James Gabriel. Allen Lane Calvey, 57, and Nikita J. Vambaketes, 36, were charged by the Madison County state's attorney with aggravated unlawful restraint, a felony, following the incident Wednesday, said police in this southern Illinois city. Calvey, whose home was burglarized in late November, also was charged with compelling a confession by force or threat, another felony, Gabriel said. Police said Calvey had apparently been investigating the burglary on his own when he and Vambaketes went Wednesday to the home of 18-year-old Dennis L. Teague. Calvey brandished a gun in the confrontation, and forced Teague to go to the Alton police station, Gabriel said. Calvey took Teague inside while Vambaketes, who then took the gun, stayed in the car, according to Gabriel. Gabriel said police had no evidence that Teague was involved in the burglary, so he was not charged in the incident. But Teague was arrested on a warrant for a past misdemeanor charge of failure to appear in court on a retail theft charge, police said. Calvey was freed on a $25,000 bond soon after his arrest, police said. Vambaketes remained in the Madison County Jail in lieu of $13,000 bond Sunday awaiting a court appearance, said a jail employee who did not give his name. The teen-ager, meanwhile, pleaded guilty Thursday to failure to appear in court, and was released after being ordered to pay a $100 fine and court costs, Gabriel said. Gabriel said he was not sure if anything was taken in the burglary of Calvey's home. Lt. Robert Lahlein, chief of detectives, said the two men exceeded their authority. ``Illinois statute gives certain arrest powers to citizens, but not under these circumstances,'' he said. ``That's why we have police.'' 
Singer-actor Yves Montand, one of France's most popular performers, rang in the New Year with a brand new baby, becoming a father for the first time at the age of 67. Valentin Giovanni Jacques was born New Year's Eve to Montand's girlfriend, 28-year-old Carole Amiel, at a private clinic in this Riviera city. The baby weighed in at 9 pounds. Talking to reporters at the clinic on New Year's Day, Montand said he felt ``a mixture of joy and worry. It is both strange, wonderful and moving.'' The singer admitted ``having first been panicked just before the birth, then to see this little superb thing, without false modesty, I was very happy and very happy for Carole. It is a beautiful baby. ... All of a sudden, I feel a new responsibility. I say to myself, `I have a son,' and at 67, life is beginning.'' Montand, born Ivo Livi to a poor family in Italy, immigrated to France with his family at the age of 3. Giovanni, he said, is his father's name, Jacques is for poet Jacques Prevert and Carole's father, ``and Valentin simply because we find it a nice name.'' Montand had no children from his 33-year marriage with actress Simone Signoret, who died in 1985. 
Singer Eddie Money is booked for a February festival celebrating improved U.S.-Soviet relations that will feature rock 'n' roll musicians, dance and gospel groups and politicians from both nations. ``It will be a giant celebration _ a potpourri of Soviet and American groups,'' said Dixie Belcher, director of Camai, an Alaska arts organization co-sponsoring the Feb. 24-25 event with the Alaska State Chamber of Commerce. Belcher said the festival was first proposed last summer by Stas Namin, a Soviet rock musician whose records have sold more than 40 million copies. Camai is still seeking commitments from other groups. The Soviet rocker will do the concert for free, while Money, known for such hits as ``Take Me Home Tonight'' and ``Walk on Water,'' will expect to get money, Belcher said. Namin, grandson of a prominent Soviet politician, began his career when Leonid Brezhnev was the Soviet leader and rock music was an underground phenomenon that flourished largely via illegal records and tapes. ``He was not allowed to perform in public,'' Belcher said. Under Gorbachev, Namin and many other Soviet rock musicians have official status as state-supported artists, and some have toured abroad. 
Woody Allen is back behind a camera, Aretha Franklin hopes to hit the typewriter keys and singer Lou Reed is preparing a tribute to Andy Warhol, all part of the coming attractions of 1989. The three are among 36 artists who told The New York Times about their projects for the new year, the newspaper reported Sunday. Their previews: _Allen, the director-writer-actor, is filming a ``contemporary comedy,'' set in New York, featuring himself, Mia Farrow, Alan Alda, Martin Landau, Anjelica Huston, Daryl Hannah, Claire Bloom and Sam Waterston. ``It runs a very, very wide gamut from extremely serious material to comic material,'' he said. _Franklin, the gospel and pop singer and songwriter, plans to write a book about her experiences, particularly her days traveling with her father and singing gospel from age 14 to 17. She'll also be performing solo concerts in the East, and she has four new songs in the works. ``Most of my songs are very romantic,'' she said, ``because I'm very sentimental.'' _Reed, the rock singer and songwriter, is working on a show honoring the late artist Warhol that is to be staged in New York in the fall. ``The piece is about Andy, and some of the songs are from his point of view,'' said Reed. 
A new trio called Heirloom is aptly named: The three women in it are each members of gospel music family groups that have performed for generations. Sheri Easter of the Lewis Family, Candy Hemphill Christmas of the Hemphills and Tanya Goodman-Sykes of the Goodman Family say they have joined together to form the trio and are in the midst of finishing an as-yet-untitled LP. The album focuses on vocals and each woman contributed a few songs. The result is a mix of ``polished bluegrass all the way to contemporary pop influences,'' Ms. Christmas said. ``The three of us together make a style of our own that is unique, but it's not foreign to what we've been doing on our own,'' she said. The three, who have all recorded solo projects as well as their work with their respective families, say they will continue to record separately and plan a tour together following their debut Friday at a Nashville concert. 
The New Year roared into Lima Sunday with a strong earthquake and on the heels of a blackout believed caused by leftist guerrillas, officials said. Civil Defense officials said they had no reports of damage or injury in the earthquake. The quake struck at 5:16 a.m. and registered at 5.5 on the Richter scale, said Miguel Morales, a spokesman for the Geophysical Institute of Peru. He said the epicenter was in the Pacific Ocean, 70 miles southwest of Lima. The New Year dawned with Pervians facing their most serious economic recession this century, with inflation expected to reach 1,800 percent this year. Last year also brought an upsurge in the Shining Path guerrilla movement's eight-year insurgency to impose Marxist rule. Saturday was the second New Year's Eve in a row that Lima, a frequent target of power outages caused by rebels, was hit by a blackout. The problems did not stop Lima residents from enjoying New Year's revelry, including the widespread use of fireworks and burning traditional bonfires on dozens of city street corners. The state power company Electro-Peru said saboteurs blew up power pylons about 10 p.m. Saturday to cause a partial power outage. It said power was cut to isolated areas in a coastal region stetching from Chiclayo, 465 miles north of Lima, to Marcona, 270 miles south of the capital. About half of Lima was blacked out, but energy was restored to most areas by midmorning Sunday, Electro-Peru said. Both of Peru's major rebel groups, the Mao-inspired Shining Path and the pro-Cuba Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement, have launched dozens of blackouts and then used the cover of darkness to carry out bombings and other attacks. Officials said they did not know which group caused the New Year's blackout, and there were no reports of any related violence. Police say the Shining Path sabotaged power pylons three times in late November and early December in an escalation of its insurgency, which has claimed more than 12,000 lives. The blackouts forced this city of 6 million to ration electric power and water, which is pumped by electricty, for three weeks before officials could repair the damaged system. 
A county jail inmate who noticed his cell was unlocked followed an off-duty sheriff's deputy and wandered past two checkpoints to freedom, authorities said. ``Somebody wasn't paying as much attention as he was supposed to,'' said Assistant Chief Deputy Bob Knowles, detentions commander for the Dallas County Sheriff's Department. But Arthur Tabor, 47, was back in jail early Saturday, a few hours after his disappearance. Police found him at the same address he had given police when he was arrested the first time, a homeless shelter. He faced the original charges of disorderly conduct and public intoxication plus a charge of escape and was held in lieu of $1,568 bond. Tabor was arrested Friday and placed in a holding cell at the Lew Sterrett Justice Center before changing into jail clothes, authorities said. Noticing the cell door was unlatched, Tabor walked out of the cell. Wearing a surgical mask because of tuberculosis, Tabor found a sheriff's officer and apparently followed the deputy because he was unsure of what he was supposed to do, officials said. ``He got into the elevator with the officer, and the officer, not realizing the man was a prisoner, walked out of the building with him,'' Knowles said. ``I don't think he intentionally tried to escape. The charges were so minor. I don't think there was any motivation.'' ``They just opened the door and let him walk. It was like, `Merry Christmas,''' said Sgt. Lonnie Franks, supervisor of the release section at the jail. Franks said Tabor walked through two checkpoints, staffed by uniformed jailers who are supposed to demand identification. The incident embarrassed jail officials, and Knowles said deputies feel lucky that no violent prisoner escaped. ``At least it wasn't someone who went out and hurt someone,'' he said. 
New Year's fireworks left thousands homeless in the Philippines and 49 revelers in Rio drowned en route to a pyrotechnics display. The superpowers swapped warm salutations, but a one-sided truce failed to silence the guns in Afghanistan. The new year came in as the old one went out, with promises of peace and bursts of tragedy. Children orphaned by an earthquake got new toys, one Korea offered a tentative olive branch to the other, five Hindus were massacred as they prayed, and the lights went out in Lima for the second straight New Year's Eve. Thousands poured into streets and squares to celebrate the arrival of 1989, from Times Square in New York to Orchard Road in Singapore on the other side of the globe. Revelers in Warsaw paid 100,000 zlotys per couple, about $200, to attend a New Year's Eve ball in the Victoria Hotel, scandalizing many Poles because it was the equivalent of six weeks' pay for the average citizen. An Italian preservation group found Sunday that the tower of Pisa leaned a little more during 1988, tilting another .0508 inches toward the ground. The Japanese went by the millions to temples and shrines Sunday to pray for health and prosperity as the year of the dragon roared out and the snake slithered in. Crown Prince Akihito, 55, stood in for his father, 87-year-old Emperor Hirohito, at annual New Year ceremonies in the imperial palace in Tokyo attended by family relatives, Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita and other leading government officials. The emperor has been ailing since Sept. 19 with internal bleeding. About 150 people boarded a cruise ship in Rio de Janeiro and set sail for a fireworks display off Copacabana Beach. It capsized, and authorities said at least 49 people drowned. ``It seems there was an excess of passengers ...,'' said Irineu Barroso, a Rio police official. ``We understand the boat was told to turn back but ignored the order.'' Illegal fireworks ignited six fires in Manila, leaving thousands homeless, authorities said. Hospital officials said seven died from shootings and stabbings in New Year's celebrations and brawls in Manila and Cebu. A check with doctors at 20 Manila hospitals showed 1,134 people were injured, mostly by fireworks, during the night. ``It's like a war zone here,'' said a doctor. ``Fingers are being amputated. People are wounded by stray bullets. They are still coming in ...'' Fire killed at least one person and destroyed 3,000 makeshift houses in one slum neighborhood, said arson investigator Cpl. Edmar Espresion. He said hundreds of homes also were burned in five other fires. At least 733 revelers in Italy were reported injured by fireworks, none seriously. In the West Berlin, about 200 youths began the New Year with a rampage, hurling bottles, rocks and fireworks at police. Seven were arrested and one policeman was reported injured. At least two deaths on New Year's Eve in West Germany were attributed to fireworks accidents, as were dozens of injuries. Four revelers in East Berlin plunged four stories when the balcony they were on broke off and fell, killing one, the ADN news agency reported. Children injured by the Dec. 7 earthquake in Armenia received toys and clothes from around the world, Tass said. The Soviet news agency said a boy from Spitak was asked what he wanted from Father Frost, a bearded man who brings gifts on New Year's. ``Let him return my mother,'' 8-year-old Armen Kazaryan said from his hospital bed. The new year elicited olive branches from leaders worldwide. North Korean President Kim Il Sung, in a New Year's speech, invited South Korean President Roh Tae-woo to a political conference in the near future. President Reagan and his Soviet counterpart, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, each sent New Year's messages to their countries and each other's. In a message made available to American television, Gorbachev said: ``Americans seem to be rediscovering the Soviet Union _ and we are rediscovering America.'' Reagan said on Soviet television, ``Despite our disagreements, we have been able to find some common ground.'' In Moscow, a 42-foot New Year's greeting card signed by 20,000 Americans arrived Sunday. Tass said signers included ex-presidential candidates Michael Dukakis and Jesse Jackson. In Rome, Pope John Paul II celebrated a New Year's Mass in St. Peter's Basilica before 20,000 worshipers. The pontiff called on nations to give special attention to minorities and for kidnappers to release their hostages. ``Let's hope that it is the year of peace, of justice, of growing solidarity, of social solicitude for each one and for everybody,'' he said. In Afghanistan, the Soviets and the Soviet-backed government promised a cease-fire on New Year's Day. But guerrillas attacked government troops in two villages Sunday in the eastern Nangarahar province, and eight guerrillas were killed, Afghanistan's official Radio Kabul said. Residents in rebel-plagued Lima greeted 1989 with a blackout for the second New Year's Eve in a row. The state power company said nearly half the city of 6 million people was affected. Leftist guerrillas were blamed for last year's blackout. A bomb blast at a temple in India killed at least five Hindus as they prayed on Sunday, 1989's first victims of continuing Sikh militant violence in India's northwestern Punjab state. 
The government has begun investigating U.S. allegations that a West German company helped Libya build a chemical weapons plant, a Foreign Ministry official said Sunday. The Bonn government was informed of the U.S. position through diplomatic channels, the official said on condition of anonymity. He said the review so far has yielded no evidence to support claims ``that German firms were involved in any illegal undertakings.'' ``We have taken this information very seriously and immediately launched an investigation,'' said the official. U.S. officials said last week that a chemical facility at Rabta, about 50 miles southwest of Tripoli, is on the verge of producing chemical weapons. Libya says the facility is a pharmaceutical plant. Companies from West Germany, Japan and Italy are believed to have helped Libya build the plant or the adjacent industrial complex. Japan told the United States its nationals believed they were involved in the construction of a fertilizer plant. At least two West German firms provided Libya with chemicals, technical assistance and special pumps and piping for the plant, U.S. News &amp; World Report said in a report released Sunday. One of the West German companies was identified as Imhausen-Chemie, the New York Times said Sunday, quoting U.S. government officials. The company's president denied any connection with the Libyan plant, the report said. ``We produce medical substances and fine chemicals ... but not so far to Libya,'' the Times quoted Jurgen Hippenstiel-Imhausen as saying. ``I never went to Libya. I don't even know where it is.'' The Times quoted American officials as saying Imhausen was at the center of a covert operation in which materials for the chemical plant were shipped to Libya through Hong Kong and other Asian ports. American officials said they were deliberately misled by a company called Japanese Steel Works, U.S. News &amp; World Report reported. Company officials told U.S. senators the firm was only building a desalinization plant, the report said. The magazine, quoting unidentified government sources, said the State Department has prepared a secret report on the role of West Germany and Japan in helping Libya, Iran, Iraq and Syria to acquire chemical-weapons capability. U.S. State Department spokeswoman Phyllis Oakley on Friday rejected Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi's offer to let the United States inspect the plant. She said a chemical weapons plant ``could easly be modified to appear as a legitimate industrial chemical plant such as a pharmaceutical or fertilizer facility.'' 
NASHVILLE, Tenn. _ A 1-year-old girl who nearly drowned in a bucket of dog food and water was in satisfactory condition Sunday at General Hospital, authorities said. Lillian Lindsey discovered her daughter, Kayla, halfway submerged Saturday in a large bucket of dog food mixed with water, detective Frank Pierce said. The child was taken to the hospital, where she was in satisfactory condition Sunday, nursing supervisor Audrey Farrell said. The baby was being kept for observation and probably would be released the first part of the week, said nursing supervisor Esther Alexander. 
Five winning tickets, including two from the same store, were sold for this week's $27 million Lotto prize, Florida Lottery officials said Sunday. Two of the five were sold at the same retail location in Largo, about 10 miles north of St. Petersburg. ``Now that's what I call starting the year with a bang,'' said Lottery Secretary Rebecca Paul, who called the sale of two winning tickets at one retail outlet ``extraordinary.'' 
A preliminary review concluded that a police sniper acted properly in killing a gunman who held up to eight people hostage in a beauty salon, but controversy remained over a mental health board's refusal to commit the man to a hospital in November. Michael Fane, 21, was shot to death by a SWAT team sniper Friday as police, afraid Fane would set off a fire bomb in the beauty salon, rescued the last hostage. Police Chief Robert Wadman said Saturday that a preliminary review indicated that officers followed proper procedure when the police sniper fired the single shot that killed Fane, 21, of Iowa City, Iowa. Fane, who told the hostages he was on a mission for God, was killed 24 hours after he walked into the salon and took eight people hostage. None of the hostages, released at intervals throughout the ordeal, was hurt. Douglas County Attorney Ron Staskiewicz said that his office will decide soon whether to call a grand jury to investigate. ``The last thing I want to do is have police officers who have been involved in a traumatic situation wait a long time,'' Staskiewicz said. ``We want to make a decision. If a grand jury needs to be called, let's get it over with.'' Fane's parents said the standoff could have been avoided if the Sarpy County (Neb.) Mental Health Board had followed the advice of a psychiatrist and the pleas of his mother to commit him to treatment. The request for commitment came after an incident at a restaurant at which Fane began screaming. Cathie Fane of El Campo, Texas, said her son had been diagnosed as having ``drug-induced schizophrenia.'' But during the Nov. 4 committal hearing, a decision was made against institutionalization because he posed no public threat, Mrs. Fane said. ``We knew that he was gone a year ago,'' she told the Houston Chronicle. ``We tried to get help for him. We tried to have him institutionalized, but lawyers fought to keep him out of the institution, so our hands were really tied.'' But board members defended their decision. Richard Wycoff, a clinical psychiatrist, said it was a ``close call'' as to whether Fane should have been committed, but there was not ``clear and convincing evidence'' that Fane was a danger either to himself or to others. Joseph Batorski, the lay member of the three-member board, also said it was not proven Fane was dangerous. 
Thirty-year-old documents made public New Year's Day reveal the government sent commandos to Oman to fight rebels threatening British interests in the Persian Gulf state, a newspaper reported Sunday. The documents were released by the Public Records Office under rules permitting publication of selected confidential papers after a 30-year lapse, The Observer said. In 1958, rebels were fighting the sultan of Oman and endangering Britain's plans to use an air base at Masirah and its interest in oil deposits believed to exist in the kingdom, the weekly newspaper said. But the use of regular British troops to crush a rebellion was considered certain to attract international criticism and the newly released Cabinet documents show how concerned then-Prime Minister Harold Macmillan and Foreign Secretary Selwyn Lloyd were to avoid such an outcome, the Observer said. In July of 1958 the sultan accepted 23 British officers for his army, including a commander and the nucleus of an air force to put down the rebels, in return for handing over the base for 99 years, The Observer said. The military assault plan was canceled over concerns about international criticism, but a government panel suggested Britain instead conduct a special operation by commandos of the clandestine Special Air Services regiment. The plan was approved and the cover story, the newspaper said, was that the 100-man SAS squadron was training the sultan's army. A second squadron was sent in December and by January 1959 the SAS had put the rebels to flight, The Observer said. Britain has had close ties with the sultanate _ an absolute monarchy _ for nearly 200 years. 
A company offering quick, cheap tests of blood cholesterol levels to people while they shop says technology has outpaced state laws governing medical testing, but the state says the company's services don't have the proper licenses and has gone to court. The lawsuit filed by the state Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services against Heart Chek of Sarasota will be a test case for the fledgling industry, attorneys say. Heart Chek has contracts to offer cholesterol readings with several store chains throughout southwestern Florida, including Publix, Albertsons and Walgreen. The procedure involves taking a few drops of blood from a fingertip and running the sample through a machine. A reading is given within minutes for $7. The state contends the process of drawing blood and analyzing it for cholesterol content falls under a 1967 statute regulating clinical laboratories, said department spokesman Stephen Kindland. But Heart Chek, which has been in business since March, believes the regulations are outdated, said company attorney Steve Herb. Herb said the suit was initially filed by HRS against Heart Chek early this September in Sarasota County Circuit Court. But he argued that the 1967 statute cited in the suit was never intended to apply to screening procedures, just clinical laboratories. The technology used nationwide for screening cholesterol was not in existence at the time that statute was written, Herb said Sunday. ``HRS is trying to take an old law and apply it to a situation that could not possibly have been foreseen in 1967,'' he said. The company, which has 20 affiliates across the South and in California, would like the new industry to be regulated by the state, but not under the existing clinical laboratory law, national President John Bell said. ``We're fighting the particular law in Florida, not the idea of being under regulatory control. We recognize the need to keep unqualified people out of the business,'' Bell said. The state told the company it should be licensed by the Department of Licensure and Certification. But Heart Chek ignored a cease-and-desist order, leaving a lawsuit as the only option to settle the question, said state health department attorney Ed Haman. ``We've filed for a court injunction to decide whether Heart Chek does qualify as a clinical lab under the statute. Until that decision comes through, we have no authority to stop the operation or regulate it at all,'' Haman said. The state defines a clinical laboratory as any business performing examinations on material from the human body to obtain information on a medical condition. Heart Chek has filed several countersuits against the state for interference with business, slander and harassment. A hearing on the merits of the countersuits is scheduled for Jan. 13, but a final decision on the state's suit is not expected until at least February, said Haman. ``As far as we know, this is the very first legal challenge to the clinical lab statute,'' he said. 
The Bureau of Alcohol Tobacco and Firearms is investigating an explosion that killed four Maryland teen-agers who were apparently experimenting with explosives. Ann Evans, spokeswoman for the Montgomery County Police Department, Sunday said evidence had been recovered from the scene of the explosion and was taken to the Rockville laboratory of the BATF. She did not expect results until the end of this week. ``There is a strong suggestion that four boys were experimenting with some type of explosives,'' Evans said Saturday. The teen-agers were killed before dawn Saturday as the four youths apparently were attempting to make a bomb in a garage at the home of a Brazilian embassy employee, police said. Two of the victims were killed instantly by the blast, while the third person died a short time after being rushed to a local hospital, Montgomery County Police Sgt. Harry Geehreng said. The fourth teen-ager died Saturday evening. The Washington Post reported in Sunday's editions that three of the young men were described as close friends and said that the four were science-oriented students who attended Walt Whitman High School in Bethesda. The newspaper identified the victims as Samir Gafsi, Dov Fischman and Bruno Perrone, all college freshmen whose ages weren't available, and Gustavo Machado, 15, the son of a Brazilian attache. Geehreng said investigators have ruled out any terrorist connection. ``Over the years we've seen young people experimenting and trying to learn about explosives,'' Geehreng said. ``Unfortunately, we've had accidents. But I don't think we've ever had anything this bad. It's just young people, I can't explain it.'' Sharmi Banik, described by the Post as Gafsi's girlfriend, said Gafsi had shown a recent interest in explosives. Gafsi and Fischman were killed instantly by the explosion, authorities said. Machado and Perrone died later after being taken to Suburban Hospital. Machado died about 8:30 a.m. Saturday, while Perrone died following eight hours of surgery. Geerheng said the explosion damaged a car in the garage but there was no evidence that a bomb had been placed in or under the vehicle. The explosion occurred at about 3:10 a.m. at the Bethesda home of Vera Machado, said Geehreng. Ms. Machado and her husband, Richard, were sleeping inside the home and were not injured, he said. A security guard who answered the telephone at the Brazilian embassy in Washington said Ms. Machado was a consular attache. The guard, who refused to give his name, said he did not know her duties. 
Suburbs that want to stake claim on the lakefront property of a century-old Army base are jockeying for position in a potential land grab should the government go through with plans to close the base. Fort Sheridan, which employs about 4,000 people, half of them civilians, is one of 86 military installations targeted for closure by a Pentagon-appointed panel. If the panel's recommendations are accepted, the bases could close between 1991 and 1995. Lake Forest, Highwood and Highland Park officials are all looking at the base's 700 acres of beachfront real estate. Developing the land could help offset the economic woes that may follow closing the base. ``I do think there is going to be a fight,'' said state Rep. Grace Mary Stern of Highland Park. ``That's prime land along Lake Michigan,'' added U.S. Rep. John Porter, whose north-suburban district includes the base and surrounding communities. ``It's not on the tax rolls.'' Federal law calls for the Army to give other federal agencies first dibs on the base, a cluster of stone buildings that looks like a wooded college campus along a stretch of beach. But Porter said he knows of no federal interest in the land. The state is second in line to get the land, but David Fields, a spokesman for Gov. James Thompson said he was not aware of any state plans for the land. That leaves the three suburbs. It has not yet been determined which, if any, of the communities would have jurisdiction over the land. Highwood tried to annex the whole base in the 1960s, but the move was struck down in court, a spokesman for the fort said. Lake County planning department documents show that the northern 100 acres have been annexed by Lake Forest, and the southernmost 150 acres have been annexed by Highland Park, leaving the middle 450 acres unclaimed. ``All the annexations don't mean a thing,'' said Highwood Mayor Fidel Ghini. ``You can't legally annex federal land.'' Ghini said Highwood has plans for the land, but he refused to say what they are. ``Did your football coach ever tell the opposition what he was going to do?'' he said. Daniel Pierce, mayor of Highland Park, said he opposed economic development of the land. ``The first priority should be open space along the lake,'' Pierce said. Lake Forest Mayor Marshall Strenger could not be reached for comment. The telephone at his home went unanswered Sunday. Porter plans to meet with officials whose constituents would be affected by the closing, including the three mayors, state legislators, and Thompson. ``It will be tough to get this thing reversed,'' Porter said. ``So I want to get all the players together at the end of January to try to get cooperation between state and local officials. 
The deaths of more than 1,300 people in El Salvador's civil war last year is part of a ``heart-breaking cry that summons us to keep striving for peace,'' Archbishop Arturo Rivera Damas said Sunday. The Roman Catholic archbishop said in his Sunday homily that 1,369 civilians, soldiers or leftist rebels were killed last year in military clashes, rightist death squad operations and car bombings or other terrorist acts. Rivera Damas customarily uses his homily to speak out against the war, which has claimed an estimated 65,000 lives since leftist rebels began battling the U.S.-backed government in 1979. The recent bombing of a Luthern church facility shows ``the path of irrational violence'' El Salavador has taken, he said. Rivera Damas also expressed concern at the resurgence of death squads. ``This situation is a heart-breaking cry that summons us to keep striving for peace with the weapons the gospel has put in our hands: the weapons of light, of hope, of reconciliation, all the fruits of love,'' he said. The archbishop also repeated his earlier condemnations of a new terror campaign by the rebels, whose death threats prompted more than 20 mayors to resign in December. 
New Year's Day brought an unexpected snowstorm to Maryland and Delaware, surprising even the National Weather Service, which had anticipated just a combination of sleet and freezing rain. Dense fog overnight in portions of California and the central United States lingered Sunday afternoon in parts of Kansas, Missouri, Iowa, Illinois and Indiana. Rain and snow fell across the middle Atlantic Coast region Sunday with heavy snow in some of the higher elevations. And light snow extended from Upper Michigan to Nebraska and the Dakotas. Heavier snow was expected in parts of Maryland, Delaware and West Virginia. Baltimore had nearly 3 inches by afternoon and Sault Ste Marie, Mich., and Washington, D.C., each received an inch of snow during the six hour period ending at 1 p.m. EST. Dry weather prevailed across most of the rest of the nation with strong and gusty winds over parts of Southern California. Temperatures were still below freezing early Sunday afternoon from the northern high Plains through the upper Mississippi Valley to Upper Michigan and northern Lower Michigan. Temperatures hovered around the freezing mark through the day in much of Maryland, with the new snow turning to slush in many areas. Readings were in the single digits or below zero Sunday afternoon from eastern Montana through the Dakotas, into Minnesota and across much of the northern Atlantic Coast region. Temperatures were in the teens or single digits in northern New England. Temperatures were generally above 60 degrees from south central Texas to the southern Atlantic Coast, with readings in the 70s across Florida, southern Georgia, South Carolina and into the lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas. Temperatures around the nation at 2 p.m. EST ranged from 8 degrees below zero at Thief River Falls, Minn., to 83 degrees at Cocoa Beach, Fla. The nation's low Sunday morning was 22 degrees below zero at Gunnison, Colo. The forecast for Monday called for snow from the Great Lakes region to northern New England. Rainshowers were expected across the Pacific Northwest, with freezing rain in some of the higher elevations. Rainshowers were also expected across much of Arizona and Southern California and from Texas to the Tennessee Valley. Dense fog was predicted for the Great Basin. It was expected to be fair across the rest of the nation, with windy conditions along the eastern slopes of the Rockies in Montana and Wyoming. Temperatures were expected to stay below freezing all day from the northern and central Rockies to northern New England and in the central Plateau. Highs were expected in the teens or single digits from eastern North and South Dakota to Upper Michigan and in northern Maine, in the 50s and 60s from the southern and central coast of California through much of Texas to the southern and middle Atlantic Coast. Readings were expected to reach the 70s from south central Texas to Florida and southern Georgia. 
A cruise ship jammed with New Year's revelers bound for a fireworks display at Copacabana Beach capsized and sank after ignoring an order to return to port, officials said Sunday. At least 51 people died and others were missing. The sightseeing ship was carrying at least 131 people _ 31 over capacity _ and sank in 65 feet of water in Rio's Guanabara Bay about 11:45 p.m. Saturday, authorities said. ``We don't know the exact cause of the sinking, but we think it was because of excess capacity,'' said Maj. Oldemiro Santos of the Rio de Janeiro state Fire Department's Maritime Group. Authorities said a search for survivors was continuing. Some were believed trapped in the hull of the vessel, said Col. Jefferson Cardoso de Bem, chief of the Maritime Group. He said he had no accurate number of survivors or the number missing because several boats in the area took part in rescue attempts, and survivors were taken to hospitals throughout the city. Among the dead was the boat's captain. The double-decked ship Bateau Mouche sank between Sugar Loaf Mountain and a small island as it rounded the bend on the western side of Guanabara Bay and prepared to enter the Atlantic Ocean. The boat, a popular tourist attraction that offers daily cruises of the bay, was to anchor in the ocean so passengers could view the midnight fireworks display at Copacabana Beach. ``The top deck was so crowded you could hardly move,'' a Brazilian woman told Brazil's TV Globo. ``The boat was completely full, including lots of children. Then everything began shaking back and forth. People were shouting: `It's going to flip over!''' Passenger Fabricio Calo, who was rescued by a fishing boat, said: ``The boat was turning and shifting. Then tables started flying, glass started crashing, and the whole boat just turned over on its side.'' Survivors said foreigners were on board. The morgue in Rio called foreign consulates for possible aid in identifying bodies, but officials said they had no breakdown. The Rio newspaper O Globo said Sunday that an American may have been on board. A Marine guard who answered the phone at the U.S. Consulate said he was not authorized to give out any information about possible U.S. victims. The vessel was so crowded that a naval vessel ordered it to return to port, but it ignored the order, said Irineu Barroso, chief of Rio's 10th police precinct. Survivors confirmed this account. ``This was not an accident,'' Calo, 38, a businessman from Sao Paulo, said in an interview at the Bateau Mouche's mooring station. ``No effort was made to control the number of passengers who got on.'' Calo said that soon after the excursion started, a patrol boat from Brazil's navy-run Port Authority circled the Bateau Mouche and appeared to be counting people. He said two uniformed men from the boat then boarded the cruise boat and forced it to return to its dock. ``But then, only about five minutes later, the Bateau Mouche went out again,'' Calo said. Paulo Soares, 28, a brother-in-law of the Bateau Mouche's captain, Camilo da Costa, 50, said at the mooring station: ``Camilo didn't want to go out. He said the boat was overloaded, and the sea was too rough. But he had no choice. He would lose his job if he didn't sail.'' A spokesman for the Sol e Mar restaurant, which organized the excursion, said at least 131 people were on board, according to an incomplete reservation list. The spokesman, speaking on condition of anonymity, refused further comment. De Bem said the Bateau Mouche's capacity was about 100. The $220-per-ticket dinner cruise was heavily promoted in local newspapers and at tourist hotels. 
The French released hot air balloons in 98 locations Sunday to launch the bicentennial of their revered revolution after preparations hampered by disorganization and modern-day political strife. They also ushered in the New Year by turning on special lights on the Eiffel Tower to mark its 100th birthday. The lights reading ``100 Ans,'' or 100 years, stand 13 yards high and will be kept on all year both night and day at the Paris monument. The balloon launchings are among the first of many special events to be held throughout the year to celebrate the 200th anniversary of the French Revolution. Festivities are to peak July 14 on the 200th anniversary of the storming of the Bastille prison in 1789, an event that has come to symbolize the revolution. Organizers acknowledged criticism in recent months that they were far behind schedule in planning the bicentennial events after the deaths of two Bicentennial Mission chiefs forced quick changes of leadership. Moreover, French pride in the watershed historical event did not prevent political bickering over how to remember it. At one point, Paris' conservative mayor Jacques Chirac, who lost to Socialist President Francois Mitterrand in May elections, complained that the government wanted to emphasize those historical details that would serve their cause today. Also in Sunday's kickoff ceremonies, a red and yellow helium balloon took flight at Paris' Tuileries Gardens carrying a man dressed in a wig and period costume. And 300,000 souvenir envelopes bearing a commemorative stamp showing three stylized birds went on sale around the country. 
Rain at a monitoring station in central Pennsylvania registered the highest acid content of 131 sites in 46 states, contributing to the state's No. 1 ranking in acidic rainfall for 1987, an environmental group said. The information was provided by the Natural Resources Defense Council, a Washington, D.C.-based, non-profit group that has lobbied for sharp reductions in pollutants that cause acid rain, such as sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides. The council said federal monitoring data revealed the most acid rain was recorded at the Leading Ridge in Huntingdon County, in central Pennsylvania. Rain there had an average pH of 4.08, which is 33 times more acidic than unpolluted rain, the council said recently. The pH scale measures acidity, with 7 being neutral. The lower the number, the more acidic the rain. Unpolluted rain is slightly acidic, with a pH of 5.6. Many pollutants are emitted by coal-fired power plants, factories and cars. The materials are thought to undergo changes in the atmosphere and fall to Earth as acid rain, snow, sleet, fog and dry particles. 
A Washington, D.C.-bound United Airlines DC-10 jetliner returned here shortly after takeoff Sunday when a faulty indicator light said an inboard flap malfunctioned, an airline spokesman said. The pilot of United Flight 52 dumped fuel over the Pacific Ocean to reduce fire hazard before returning to Los Angeles International Airport, where the jumbo jet landed safely shortly before 9 a.m., said Tommy Aina, Federal Aviation Administration regional duty officer. ``The indicator light was malfunctioning and replaced,'' said United Airlines spokesman Rob Doughty from Chicago. ``The flap was fine.'' Failure of the inboard flap to retract would have increased the drag on the aircraft and caused it to burn more fuel, so the pilot decided to return, he said. Fire trucks and other emergency equipment were standing by, but were not needed, Aina said. There were 259 passengers and 10 crew members on the plane, Doughty said. Flight 52 was scheduled to depart Los Angeles at 7:40 a.m., bound for Washington's Dulles International Airport. The same plane took off for Washington after a 2{ hour delay, Doughty said. 
The Soviet-backed Afghan government began a cease-fire New Year's Day, but U.S.-backed Moslem rebels rejected the truce and attacked government troops in two villages, Afghan radio said. The cease-fire offer was made Friday by Afghan President Najib, and the Soviet Union announced Saturday that its troops would join the truce. In a televised address to his nation Sunday, Najib complained that rebels have expanded operations against his government and repeated his offer of direct talks with them, Tass reported. He also rejected any future Afghan government that excludes the present leadership, the official Soviet news agency said. The rebels recently opened talks with Soviet representatives. Guerrillas attacked government troops Sunday in two villages in the eastern Nangarahar province, official Radio Kabul reported in a broadcast monitored in Islamabad. The radio said eight guerrillas were killed and seven wounded in the attack on the military posts in Gushta and Deh Bala. It gave no casualty figures for government troops, but it said soldiers launched mopping up operations against the rebels after the attack. Rebel leader Ahmad Shah said the cease-fire was ``a condemnable suggestion.'' The seven-party Guerrilla Alliance named Shah head of the Provisional Islamic Governmnent, which has yet to be installed. ``It only shows how desperate Najib is,'' Shah said in a statement issued in Peshawar. ``Najib has repeatedly proposed such meaningless cease-fires, but every time we rejected them.'' Rebel spokesman Masood Khalili said of Najib's offer: ``We did not start our fight because he asked us to. And we won't stop because he asked us to.'' Khalili belongs to the Jamiat-e-Islami guerrilla group. An estimated 100,000 Soviet soldiers marched into Afghanistan in 1979 to help the Marxist government fight Moslem rebels. Half of the Soviet troops left last year under the terms of a U.N.-brokered accord signed in Geneva by Afghanistan, Pakistan, the United States and the Soviet Union. The rest of the Red Army troops are to withdraw by Feb. 15. The U.S.-backed rebels, which also are supported by Pakistan, have demanded that a broad-based government be established in Kabul to take over the administration when the Soviets leave. 
A 14-month-old Florida boy who received a liver and small intestine in an experimental transplant was doing well Sunday and may be moved out of intensive care soon, doctors said. Calvin Oliveira remained in critical but stable condition Sunday afternoon at the University of Wisconsin Hospital and Clinics. He underwent the double transplant Saturday. ``I'm very happy to announce that baby Calvin is doing very well this morning,'' said Dr. Munci Kalayoglu, chief surgeon and director of liver transplants. ``As a surgeon, I'm very happy with the operation,'' Kalayoglu said, adding that the infant could be transferred out of the intensive care unit Monday. Calvin suffered from Short Bowel Syndrome, a rare disorder which left only 5 percent of his small intestine functional. The child's liver deteriorated as a result of the intravenous feeding the condition required. Doctors said the child was near death when the two organs from a Rochester, N.Y., baby became available Friday. Calvin was flown from Deerfield Beach, Fla., to Madison for the eight-hour operation. Despite the initial success of the operation, Calvin was not out danger, Kalayoglu said. The next three months will be critical in determining whether his body will reject the new liver and small intestine, the doctor said. 
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher distanced herself Sunday from U.S. vows to punish whoever planted the bomb that destroyed Pan Am Flight 103. ``I don't think an eye for an eye and tooth for a tooth is ever valid,'' she said in a wide-ranging New Year's television interview. ``The most important thing to do is to try to get the cooperation of all nations to track these people down so that they are brought to justice,'' she said on the ``David Frost on Sunday'' program on the commercial TV-am channel. The danger of revenge, she said, is that ``it can affect innocent people.'' President Reagan said in his weekly radio broadcast Saturday that the United States would punish those responsible for the bomb, which brought the Boeing 747 down in southern Scotland, killing all 259 people on board and leaving 11 on the ground missing and presumed dead. He said a report overseen by President-elect George Bush advocating possible military action against terrorists ``ought to be giving some people sleepless nights'' in the wake of the Dec. 21 bombing. He did not elaborate. Bush vowed last week to ``seek hard and punish firmly, decisively, those who did this, if you could ever find them.'' FBI Director William Sessions said Sunday the investigation of the crash could be lengthy and welcomed any help that PLO chief Yasser Arafat might be able to provide. Arafat ``has a great deal of information, a wealth of information he can give us,'' Sessions said on U.S. network television. The idea of such cooperation arises in the wake of newly opened talks between the U.S. and Palestine Liberation Organization officials that began after Arafat disavowed terrorism and recognized Israel's right to exist. Last week the Kuwaiti newspaper Al-Seyasseh quoted an unidentified PLO official as saying the organization was considering a request by U.S. officials that the PLO help in tracking down those responsible for the bombing. Sessions, whose agency is helping in the crash investigation, said he is optimistic of eventually finding out who planted the bomb. He added that he has no evidence to confirm the bomb was the work of terrorists rather than someone acting against someone on board. Mrs. Thatcher allowed Reagan to use U.S. bombers based in Britain to bomb Libya in 1986 in retaliation for alleged Libyan involvement in international terrorism. She said Sunday that no country should grant the Pan Am bombers safe haven or permit them to escape justice. ``I think public opinion is disgusted with nations that will not try to track down terrorists, absolutely disgusted.'' U.S. officials say no group has offered a credible claim of responsibility for the attack. Speculation on suspects has focused mostly on Palestinian extremists and pro-Iranian Shiite Moslems. Searchers in Lockerbie, Scotland, gave up their traditional New Year's celebrations Sunday to continue the hunt for bodies and wreckage. Police said that one more body, thought to be one of the missing local residents, was recovered, bringing the total to 242. Only 35 have been identified and released to relatives for burial. Capt. Bruce Smith, a Pan Am pilot whose English wife, Ingrid, was killed, was quoted in The Sunday Telegraph as saying the Scottish police were ``paralyzed by inexperience and incompetence.'' John Boyd, chief constable of the Dumfries and Galloway police, replied at a news conference, ``I am sure no one would thank me for shortcutting any legal or evidential gathering processes which may ... help to bring the person or persons (responsible) to justice.'' More than 700 people are expected at a memorial service Wednesday in Lockerbie, and 1,000 more will watch on monitor screens in nearby halls. British newspapers reported Saturday that investigators believe the bomb was smuggled onto the flight in Frankfurt, possibly by a Lebanese-born passenger duped into carrying it. The West German government said no evidence supports those reports. Flight 103 originated in Frankfurt with a Boeing 727 jet and switched to a Boeing 747 at London's Heathrow Airport for the trip to New York. The Sunday Times of London said the bomb was loaded into the airplane's forward cargo hold next to the electronic nerve center which keeps the jet airborne. News reports in Britain and the United States said the bomb may have been unwittingly brought on board the flight by Khalid Jaafar, a 21-year-old Lebanese student. Khalid, who was living in Frankfurt, was en route to Dearborn, Mich., to visit his father when he died in the crash. His father, Nazir Jaafar, said the FBI questioned him about the reports Friday and told him ``they have no evidence against my son.'' 
Rocket and artillery clashes between rival Shiite Moslem militias in Beirut's southern slums shattered a short-lived cease-fire Sunday, killing seven people and wounding eight, police said. The wounded included two Syrian soldiers who belonged to a peacekeeping contingent that managed to arrange the cease-fire before midday, a police spokesman said. It was not clear whether the other casualties were combatants or civilians, said the spokesman, who cannot be named under standing regulations. The fighting erupted between gunmen of the Syrian-backed Amal (``Hope'') militia against the pro-Iranian Hezbollah, or Party of God. The two factions are locked in a prolonged struggle for dominance of Lebanon's 1-million-strong Shiite sect. Sunday's clashes came after several days of skirmishing between the two militias. The last serious oubreak of fighting took place in November when 40 people were killed and 87 wounded in Moslem-controlled west Beirut and the slums. Syria maintains about 40,000 troops in east and north Lebanon as well as west and south Beirut under a 1976 Arab League peacekeeping mandate. 
A New Year's Eve fire at a juvenile detention center, apparently started during a jailbreak, left 11 teen-age immates dead and five injured, police reported. Police Maj. Patricio Araya said on the scene that 18 of the detention center's 100 inmates escaped. Authorities said inmates battled with officers who tried to put out the fire. ``The exact causes for the fire are being investigated,'' Araya said. ``But it clearly seems it started when the inmates attempted a escape.'' Authorities at the detention center in the capital also said the fire, which broke out five minutes before midnight Saturday, was ``apparently'' started by the inmates themselves as part of an escape plan. Nine of the victims died in a bathroom where they sought refuge, and 2 others died at the center's dormitory, Maj. Araya said. The fire ``started at the dormitory, at two or three beds. Apparently, it was intentionally caused to trigger a mutiny and escape,'' said a communique issued by the government agency running the detention center. ``When officers tried to put the fire down, they were attacked by the immates, some of them carrying pieces of glass from windows they broke,'' the communique added. It said the fire spread quickly through the old single-story building. Monday morning relatives of the inmates gathered in front of the destroyed center awaiting to hear from their relatives. Many women cried as officials explained them that the victims were still being identified. Justice Minister Hugo Rosende, visiting the detention center Sunday morning, said the inmates in the center were aged 16 to 18. He said because of the lack of money, authorities were forced to lodge ``highly dangerous criminals and petty criminals in the same place.'' 
More oil-covered sea birds were found over the weekend in what revised Coast Guard estimates show was one of the worst oil spills in Washington history. Some 2,000 sea birds have died since Dec. 23, when a damaged barge lost as much as 231,000 gallons of oil off Grays Harbor, state Department of Wildlife spokesman Ron Holcomb said Sunday. The dead birds include about 1,650 found on ocean beaches from Oregon and Washington, about 350 birds that were euthanized because of their poor condition, and some others that died at a bird cleaning center, Holcomb said. Volunteers working daily since the spill have cleaned about 420 birds and released a dozen, Holcomb said. Oil globs washed ashore as far as the northern tip of the Olympic Peninsula, including national wildlife refuges stretching for about 75 miles in Washington. Cleanup crews Sunday focused mainly at La Push, about 70 miles north of where the spill occurred. More than 2,000 live birds have been received at a cleanup center at the Ocean Shores Convention Center, and hundreds of them still needed cleaning, Holcomb said. The Coast Guard on Saturday revised its estimate of the spill and put the amount at 168,000 to 231,000 gallons, said Mark Stewart of the state Division of Emergency Management. Washington state's previous largest oil spill occurred on Dec. 21, 1985, when the ARCO Anchorage ran aground in Port Angeles harbor and spilled about 239,000 gallons of crude. The oil polluted the Strait of Juan de Fuca, which separates the northern Olympia Peninsula from Canada's Vancouver Island and leads from the Pacific Ocean to Puget Sound. 
President Joaquim Chissano has announced a one-year extension of an amnesty offered to anti-government rebels, the national news agency reported Sunday. The year-old amnesty was to expire at the end of 1988, but Chissano said the program will continue for another year ``to save lives and promote the harmony of the nation,'' the news agency AIM said. Under the amnesty, a full pardon is granted to rebels of the Mozambique National Resistance if they give up to authorities. The leftist government says about 3,000 rebels have been given amnesty. The rebels have waged a destructive hit-and-run insurgency since 1977. 
The Soviet Union soon will ban the export of consumer goods ranging from caviar to children's shoes and will limit travelers to $160 worth of souvenirs, the official news agency Tass said Sunday. The radical changes in export and customs regulations evidently are aimed at remedying an extreme shortage of consumer goods in the Soviet Union and assuaging citizens angry over the scarcity of such basic items as soap and windshield wipers. Tass said the restrictions approved by the Council of Ministers will take effect Feb. 1 and last until the end of 1990. It did not give a date for the decision. The brief announcement limiting exports of consumer goods to 100 rubles, or $160 under the government-decreed exchange rate, per person specifically included tourists. But it did not explain the effect of the ruling on the Soviet Union's attempts to earn scarce hard currency by selling the best caviar, fur hats and coats, vodka and souvenirs in stores that require dollars, pounds or other freely convertible money. Tass said it will be forbidden to export televisions, refrigerators, freezers, washing and sewing machines, children's clothing and shoes, coffee and caviar. Coffee is not grown in the Soviet Union, and the import duty is up to $15 a pound. The announcement also said customs duties will climb to 20 to 100 percent of the retail price on vacuum cleaners, mixers, coffee-grinders, irons, radios, cameras, automobile parts and other items. It was not clear if this meant import or export duties. Export limits were imposed recently in Czechoslovakia and several other East European countries after complaints that tourists from neighboring socialist nations were stripping their stores bare of consumer goods. The growing practice prompted a Soviet economist, Marina Pavlova-Silvanskaya, to warn in Soviet Culture on Sunday of an impending ``trade war'' among socialist countries. Many Russians travel to Eastern Europe on shopping trips, and Ms. Pavlova-Silvanskaya herself reminisced about trips to East Germany and Poland. She said her boss insisted that ``the program had to include a visit to some institution named for Lenin, lest the Germans or Poles think the citizens of the nation of the Great October Revolution are coming to shop.'' None of the socialist countries of Eastern Europe has fully convertible currencies, and they trade with each other based on exchange rates that often do not cover the exporting country's cost of production, much less a profit. Ms. Pavlova-Silvanskaya noted that capitalist countries don't find an invasion of shoppers a problem _ in fact, just the reverse. On Nov. 7, a holiday in Hungary, 100,000 Hungarians went to Austria and spent $42 million in hard currency, she wrote. Rather than limit exports, the Austrians responded to the horde of shoppers with advertisements in Hungarian newspapers, inviting them back on their next day off, Ms. Pavlova-Silvanskaya noted. 
Finance Minister Shimon Peres on Sunday unveiled an economic recovery plan aimed at reducing inflation by cutting wages and spending for defense, health and welfare. Peres said at a news conference he plans to stimulate growth in the economy by pumping money into flagging industries and liberalizing investment regulations. The proposed budget cut is 1 billion shekels, or about $600 million, Peres said. The government adopted a $31 billion budget for 1988. About a quarter of the cuts will come out of defense spending, putting at risk the jobs of up to 4,000 defense industry employees, Israeli news reports said. Peres said his long-range aim is to reduce unemployment, which he said hit 7 percent because of a lack of economic growth in the past year. The plan was the most sweeping economic program introduced since a July 1985 program curbed annual inflation of 440 percent down to a current level of about 20 percent a year. Peres said he wants to reduce inflation to a single-digit figure by year's end. ``We must reach a European level of inflation to survive,'' he said, but did not give a specific target figure. ``Stability is endangered and we are liable to sink into a deep recession with continuing inflation. ... Our economy needs these measures like a breath of fresh air.'' Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir said he supports the new program. ``I hope it will be accepted and implemented,'' Shamir said on Israel radio, adding that he hoped ``the budget cuts would not hurt too much.'' The government's figures for last year reflect zero growth in production and gross national product and a drop in exports and tourism, major sources of foreign currency. Many of the nation's farms are debt-ridden and many factories are failing. Israeli officials have blamed the nearly 13-month Palestinian uprising in the occupied lands for some of the economic difficulties, including the decline in tourism. Israel radio quoted Peres as saying that the uprising led to a 2 percent drop in Israel's gross national product, a decrease of about $600 million in exports to the occupied lands, and a 30-percent drop in tourism. Peres, the former foreign minister, proposed curbing inflation by cutting government spending on the army, schools, and hospitals and by halting the longstanding practice of giving automatic cost-of-living increases to salaried workers. Yisrael Kessar, leader of the nationwide Histadrut Labor Union Federation, criticized the proposals. ``It is inconceivable to force workers ... to bear the entire burden of this plan,'' Kessar said on army radio. The Cabinet heard a report about the plan at its weekly session but made no decisions about budget cuts. While the Cabinet was meeting, however, Peres implemented other decisions related to the plan. Subsidies for food staples such as milk, bread and frozen chicken were slashed, raising their prices by up to 26 percent. The Bank of Israel devalued the shekel by 8 percent against the U.S. dollar after a 5 percent devaluation last week. The devaluation was aimed at helping export industries, which have been operating at a loss because the exchange rate was frozen. Peres outlined other proposals to help electronics, textiles and other industries. They include liberalizing regulations to encourage investment from abroad, setting aside more funds for troubled factories that come up with viable recovery plans, and lowering interest rates on loans. 
Workers plucked pieces of boats from the water Sunday at a harbor where at least 50 yachts were destroyed in an explosion that set off a chain-reaction fire. The Saturday night explosion was aboard a pleasure boat moored at the Watergate Yachting Center. The blaze spread to dozens of boats and was brought under control about two hours later. Watergate Harbor Master Tony Buchanon said bystanders first tried to push the boat away from the pier but the wind brought it back. Between 50 and 60 crafts were destroyed, said Buchanon and Chief Frank Janoch of the Kemah Fire Department. Buchanon estimated damage at between $2 million and $4 million. One firefighter was slightly hurt. On Sunday, workers skimmed oil and gas off the water and picked up pieces of boats. Arson investigators also were looking into the cause of the blaze. ``As far as the cause of the fire, we'll probably never know,'' Janoch said. ``It was such as intense fire, and the one that started it all is on the bottom.'' 
PLO chairman Yasser Arafat raised the Palestinian flag on the Embassy of Palestine on Sunday, the 24th anniversary of Arafat's Fatah guerrilla group and the group's first attack on Israel. ``Long live the Palestinian revolution. Long live Palestine. Long Live Arafat!'' chanted a crowd of some 500 Palestinians as Arafat kissed the green, white, red and black flag, then hoisted it atop the $5-million sandstone building donated by the kingdom. ``We are your soldiers, Abu Ammar!'' they shouted, using Arafat's nom-de-guerre. Several ambassadors, mainly Asian and Arab, attended the inauguration of the Palestinian embassy. No American diplomat was present. The official Saudi Press Agency later quoted Arafat as saying the embassy was a gift from King Fahd of Saudi Arabia to the ``children of stones, the nation of stones, the revolution of stones, the intefadeh of stones.'' The Palestine Liberation Organization leader was referring to the Palestinian uprising in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip known in Arabic as the intefadeh, where Palestinian protestors use stones for weapons in clashes with Israeli soldiers. At least 345 Palestinians and 14 Israelis have been killed since the violence began Dec. 8, 1987. Prince Salman Bin Abdel-Aziz, governor of Riyadh, said he was praying for the chance ``to raise the flag of Saudi Arabia in a liberated, independent Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine,'' the agency said. Saudi Arabia announced Wednesday that it was granting the PLO office in Riyadh full diplomatic status and its director, Rafik Natsheh, will rank as an ambassador. The kingdom was one of the first countries to recognize the state of Palestine, proclaimed Nov. 15 by the Palestine National Council, the PLO's parliament-in-exile. Algeria and Iraq have also granted PLO offices embassy status. Ninety countries have so far recognized the new Palestinian state, which has no territory and, as yet, no government. Saudi Foreign Minister Prince Saud al-Faisal attended the ceremony Sunday. Arafat arrived at the embassy in a Mercedes limousine flying the Palestinian flag, accompanied by Prince Salman. Sunday also marked 24 years since Arafat formed Fatah, the main guerrilla group belonging to the PLO, which serves as an umbrella organization for several groups. The day also marks Fatah's first attack on Israel. Arafat himself participated in a Dec. 28, 1965, guerrilla attack on an Israeli water installation in northern Israel. There were no casualties in that attack. On the eve of what is known as ``Fatah Day,'' Arafat, 59, addressed Palestinians Saturday through the Baghdad-based ``Voice of the Palestinian Revolution.'' ``We were able to impose our will on the United States to recognize the Palestinian reality,'' Arafat said of the newly initiated PLO-U.S. dialogue. Washington lifted the 13-year ban on dealings with the PLO after Arafat explicitly recognized the state of Israel and renounced terrorism Dec. 15 in Geneva. ``We are looking for the results of this dialogue in the region shortly,'' Arafat said in his address. Arafat said: ``The Israeli enemy has tried but failed over the years of occupation to create alternatives which he can manipulate as he wants to implement his criminal policies. But all his efforts ... have been broken on the rock of the steadfastness of our people. He hailed the uprising in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and said it shall continue until the end of Israeli occupation. ``Now the hour of victory is tolling.'' 
New Year's revelers' gunfire struck police cars, knocked out electricity and left one man dead, while another man was killed by police for allegedly firing at an unmarked patrol car, officials said Sunday. Celebratory gunfire on New Year's Eve and the Fourth of July has plagued the city in recent years, prompting lawmakers to enact a new law making such random shooting a felony. But police said most of the shootings at patrol cars on Saturday and early Sunday were intentional. ``Three were definitely directed at the cars, one was possibly just a bullet fallen from the sky,'' said police Lt. Dave Hepburn. The body of a man killed by a gunshot wound to his head was found near a housing project about 2 a.m., the likely victim of random gunfire, said Hepburn. The man's identity was not immediately known. Officer Scott Krowber was grazed in the head by a bullet fired through the rear window of his unmarked patrol car outside the same housing project, where hundreds of bullet casings were found Sunday, said police Lt. William Hall. Two officers in a patrol car following Krowber's fired at the gunman, Hall said. The victim was identified as Salomon Moreno, 29. Krowber was treated and released at St. Francis Medial Center for his head wound, said a nursing supervisor. Earlier, a police sergeant cruising through a southside neighborhood in a patrol car was fired upon about 9 p.m. Two slugs pierced the vehicle and passed through the other side, Hepburn said. About two hours later, another sergeant traveling alone in a patrol car through a neighborhood was fired upon, Hepburn said. Five slugs hit the car but the sergeant was able to speed away and avoid injury. A 2-square-mile area in the Firestone district, about five miles south of downtown, lost electrical power about 11:30 p.m. because of New Year's gunfire, county Sheriff's Deputy Bob Nimtz said. ``Deputies believe holiday revelers firing bullets into the air caused the outage by striking the glass insulators holding the wires onto the poles,'' Nimtz said. Power was cut to about 8,700 Southern California Edison customers and about 500 remained without electricity Sunday, said utility spokesman Steve Hansen. 
At least two people were killed Sunday when a single-engine airplane crashed into snowbound, mountainous terrain, authorities said. The Piper crashed about 10 a.m. near Mount San Antonio in the San Gabriel Mountains about 40 miles northeast of downtown Los Angeles, said Los Angeles County Sheriff's Deputy Roger Peterson. A man was found dead and two women were taken by helicopter from the wreckage, but one of the women later died, officials said. The surviving woman was listed in critical condition at Huntington Memorial Hospital, said nursing supervisor Marlene Wade. Heavy snow and bad weather was slowing the search for other people who might have been on board, said sheriff's Deputy Bob Nimtz. ``The snow is so deep and the wreckage is scattered over such a wide area,'' Nimtz said, adding that high winds combined with the cold to hamper the investigation. No further details were available. 
The tower of Pisa leaned more in 1988 than the previous year but is expected to stand for more than another century, an expert who measured the incline said Sunday. Giuseppe Toniolo, head of a group charged with the preservation of the monument, said that during the past year the medieval tower shifted 0.0508 inches. The 180-foot tower leaned 0.028 inches in 1987. Toniolo said the tower has leaned an average of 0.0508 inches over the past 60 years. ``Some years it's a little less, some years a little more,'' he said. ``There is no important variation this year. The only time we would be worried would be if the tilt was more than 2 millimeters (0.08 inches).'' Toniolo said if the tower continues to lean at the current rate it would topple over in 100 to 150 years. Begun in 1173, the tower was only 34 feet high when the soil underneath it began to give way, causing it to tilt. It was completed between 1360 and 1370. 
A bomb blast at a Hindu temple killed at least five Hindus on Sunday, the year's first victims of continuing Sikh militant violence in India's troubled northwestern Punjab state. At least 20 others were injured in the explosion that occurred when Hindus were praying at the shrine in Chawinda Devi town, 20 miles east of Amritsar, police and news reports said. Police blamed the militant Sikh group Babbar Khalsa, one of about a dozen militant underground groups operating in the state, for the blast. Elsewhere in Punjab, at least four others were killed Sunday in Sikh militant violence, Press Trust of India news agency said. Sikhs make up 2 percent of India's population but are in a majority in Punjab state. Sikh militants, claiming they are discriminated against by the country's Hindus who make up more than 80 percent of the population, have waged a bloody campaign of secession since 1982 for an independent Sikh state. At least 2,440 people were killed in militant violence in 1988. Many of those killed were moderate Sikhs opposed to violence. 
The archbishop of Managua condemned the human rights situation in Nicaragua Sunday during his New Year's Day mass, saying it has caused an exodus of professionals, workers and peasants. ``Will our Nicaraguan brothers continue to abandon the country in search of better horizons because here life is impossible?'' Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo asked in his homily to thousands gathered in front of the ruins of the metropolitan cathedral. The cathedral, like much of Managua, was destroyed in an earthquake shortly before the leftist Sandinistas took power in 1979 and has not been rebuilt. ``Will people continue to die in strange circumstances? Will kidnappings and manipulation of the pain of Nicaragua's mothers continue?'' he asked. The comment appeared to be a reference to charges published periodically in the opposition newspaper La Prensa that the leftist Sandinista government has committed human rights violations. ``No,'' Obando y Bravo exclaimed to loud applause. ``This year cannot be a copy of the one before because we are determined to make it something new.'' He did not elaborate. Obando y Bravo also attacked the government for limiting press freedom, saying there is no freedom of thought without freedom of the press. The government has shut down La Prensa several times and suspended broadcasts of several radio stations. The New Year's mass, part of a ``day of peace'' declared by Pope John Paul II and also a commemoration of the 75th anniversary of the Managua archdiocese, was broadcast on the Roman Catholic radio station Radio Catolica. Church spokesman Monsignor Bosco Vivas said other stations refused to carry the service. He did not say why, but other sources said they were acting under government orders. Obando y Bravo is a frequent and outspoken critic of the leftist government. He also heads a national commission that will oversee any peace accord reached by the government and the U.S.-backed Contra rebels. A cease-fire has been in place since March, but talks on a permanent end to the 8-year-old civil war broke down in September. 
An earthen dike gave way early Sunday, sending a 12-foot wall of water down the Virgin River that forced the overnight evacuation of 1,500 people, flooded homes and forced authorities to close Interstate 15. No injuries were reported. ``If you had had a surfboard, you could have just rode the wave. It was that forceful,'' said Mike Brunn, a member of the Washington County Search and Rescue Team. St. George City Manager Gary Esplin said that by noon, electrical, water and other utilities had been restored to areas that were flooded. Evacuees were being allowed to return to their homes as the floodwaters receded. Washington County officials said 50 to 60 homes and 100 apartments were flooded. Numerous abandoned cars, trucks and trailers in low-lying areas also were covered. Interstate 15 _ the main route between Salt Lake City and Los Angeles _ was closed south of St. George where the freeway enters the narrow Virgin River Gorge. Officials reopened the freeway about 14 hours later. Gov. Norm Bangerter, who flew to the area 300 miles south of Salt Lake City, declared the region a disaster area, which will help facilitate federal aid for the southwestern Utah communities. ``Will we rebuild? The answer is `yes' to that, an unequivocal yes,'' the governor said. The failed dike, which helped contain the Quail Creek Reservoir, was built in 1983 at a cost of $3 million. Bangerter said state engineers would try to determine the cause of the 300-foot-wide breach in the dike, located 14 miles east of this town of about 12,000. The 2,500-foot-long earthen dike that broke is a section of the Quail Creek Dam. When the 50-foot-high dike gave way, it left low-lying areas awash. In all, 25,000 acre feet of water rushed through the dike breach, but the flow had been reduced to a trickle by midday, said Ronald Thompson, chairman of the Washington County Water Conservancy District. Thompson estimated it would take at least six months to design and rebuild the dike. State engineers were inspecting bridges and other highway structures in the flood path. Thompson said the dike had a history of seepage dating to when the reservoir was filled in 1985, but previous leakage had been repaired with little difficulty. He said new seepage was discovered about 10 a.m. Saturday, and that by 8 p.m. what had been a small water loss had expanded to a major leak. Heavy equipment was dispatched to reinforce the dike, but by 10:30 p.m. it became apparent nothing could be done to stop the dike from failing and the machinery was pulled out. Authorities said 100 units of an apartment complex sustained water and mud damage. At the flooding's height, water was reported window high. Overnight, local Mormon Church authorities opened their chapels to evacuated families and Red Cross officials appealed to community residents to open their homes to the displaced. There were no reports of injuries, even though there was confusion when civil defense sirens blew shortly after midnight. Some residents thought it was a new year's celebration, not an evacuation warning, officials said. Others, attending New Year's parties, were away from their homes when the evacuation was ordered, said St. George Mayor Carl Brooks. 
Sudan's prime minister promised political change Sunday but charged that demonstrators who rioted against price increases were ``struck by madness'' and seeking illegal political gains. At least four people died, apparently all in one Khartoum shooting incident, during four days of street violence last week that led to a general strike. After the strike began Thursday, the government backed down, rescinding steep price increases and making salary hikes for millions of Sudanese retroactive to July 1. The demonstrators then changed their focus mainly into a protest of Prime Minister Sadek Mahdi's failure to endorse a draft peace accord signed Nov. 16. The protests finally ended Saturday. Trade unions and political parties also remain unsatisfied with the government's stand. They scheduled a meeting with Mahdi on Monday to discuss further economic reforms and peace. In a nationally broadcast speech marking Sudan's 33rd anniversary of independence from Britain and Egypt, Mahdi named no names in his bitter attack on demonstration organizers. ``Some people want to make use of legal differences, some who have been struck by madness,'' Mahdi said at a rally in el-Obeid, 200 miles southwest of Khartoum. ``For them to try and develop these differences into an uprising is harmful and wrong. Mahdi promised political changes but didn't specify whether he meant economic reforms or stepping up efforts to end the war. ``Our next steps in the government are holding wide consultations and serious, responsible studies to review our performance,'' he said in the speech broadcast over the official Omdurman Radio. The Democratic Unionist Party, which negotiated the peace treaty with southern rebels, has quit the governing coalition. Party leaders said they wanted to express sympathy with the strikers and to dramatize their outrage at Mahdis' handling of the proposed agreement to end Sudan's 5{-year-old civil war. The Democratic Unionists dominate the 2-million-member Sudanese Workers' Trade Union Federation, which brought the people into the streets and called the general strike. It acted after the government increased prices of essential commodities by up to 600 percent and imposed a 15-percent across-the-board sales tax. Government sources said the premier is expected to announce a new coalition Tuesday with the fundamentalist National Islamic Front replacing the centrist Democratic Unionists as junior partner to Mahdi's Umma Party. In a radio message from the Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa on Saturday, renegade army Col. John Garang, the rebel leader, described the outlook for peace in the New Year as bleak but said it could have been promising. Garang blamed Mahdi's ignoring the tentative peace plan for the impasse in the peace process. Rebel leader Garang took up arms in 1983 to fight the Moslem-dominated government in Khartoum for economic, social and political changes in the mainly Christian and animist south. 
Author Daniel Curley, an award-winning novelist whose works include ``Mummy'' and ``How Many Angels,'' was killed in a traffic accident while on vacation in Florida, authorities said. Curley, 70, and his wife, Audrey, 56, were hit by a car Friday night as they crossed a street, said Tallahassee Police Lt. Duane West. Mrs. Curley suffered two broken legs and remained hospitalized. Curley, a University of Illinois professor, won both the Guggenheim and Flannery O'Connor prizes. ``He was very important both for what he wrote himself and what he helped others to write,'' said his friend, Roger Ebert, film critic for the Chicago Sun-Times. ``How Many Angels?'' was Curley's first novel, and was published in 1958. His most recent, ``Mummy,'' won critical acclaim last year for its use of ``magic realism'' techniques, a departure from his usual realistic style. Another novel was ``A Stone Man, Yes,'' which won two national awards. And he published several story collections, including ``That Marriage Bed of Procrustes,'' ``In the Hands of Our Enemies,'' ``Love in the Winter'' and ``Living with Snakes.'' ``Hilarion'' was a children's book he wrote. Curley also encouraged young writers as editor of the literary magazine ``Ascent.'' Originally named ``Accent,'' the magazine was the first to publish several major writers, Flannery O'Connor among them, and continued to be a major literary voice of the 1980s. Curley was planning to retire at the end of this school year. A retirement celebration had been planned in April in Urbana, in which former students would come together to perform readings from his works. The function could still go on as a memorial, said Marcia Kirkpatrick, one of his friends. Curley is survived by his wife, four daughters and a stepdaughter. He was to be cremated and his ashes interred, but no date was set. 
Authorities were searching Sunday for two men who opened fire on a sheriff's deputy during a routine traffic stop on Interstate 40. Navajo County Sheriff's Deputy Bob Varner, 51, was listed in critical condition at Barrow Neurological Center in Phoenix following Saturday night's attack. Varner was shot three times, once in the head and once in each forearm, with one of the latter bullets also hitting his chest, said sheriff's Lt. Terry Deboer. Varner apparently stopped the men about 7:30 p.m. Saturday, but ``we don't know the circumstances of why he stopped that car,'' said Arizona Department of Public Safety spokesman Sgt. Allan Schmidt. Investigators believed the two men got out of their car and started shooting before Varner was able to get out of his vehicle, Schmidt said. The men fled after the shooting and were believed to have shot at a second police car later Saturday night. No one was injured in the second shooting. The men were wearing camouflage jackets and possibly military boots, and were armed with rapid-fire automatic weapons, Schmidt said. Their car, containing several automatic weapons, was found abandoned on the interstate. More than 100 law officers and three helicopters were involved in the search. 
With AM-Israel-Border 
Israel on Sunday deported to Lebanon 13 Palestinians suspected of leading the year-old uprising, culminating a bloody weekend in which six Palestinians died in clashes with Israeli troops. In the occupied West Bank, Palestinians set off firecrackers and held parades, dancing and waving pictures of PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat to mark the 24th anniversary of Arafat's Fatah guerrilla group and its first attack on Israel. At least nine Arabs were shot and wounded in the occupied lands, including a 17-year-old critically wounded by a bullet in the head, Arab and military reports said. The army confirmed five casualties and said it was checking further. A military helicopter flew the deportees over Israel's northern border and dropped them in Lebanon, military sources said. They were each given about $50 in cash, the sources said. However, a police spokesman in Rashaya, Lebanon, said the deportees reported they refused the money. The spokesman said on condition of anonymity that the 13 were dropped off at the border village of Metulla and traveled by car to the Bekaa Valley in the east, where they joined a base run by the Marxist Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. Two other Palestinians agreed to leave voluntarily in a deal with authorities. The army said the two would be allowed to return to their homes in occupied territory if they refrain from anti-Israeli activity during a five-year period of exile. Seven of the Palestinians deported Sunday were from the occupied West Bank, and six were from the occupied Gaza Strip, a military spokesman said. The expulsions brought the number of Palestinians deported since the uprising began a year ago to 49. Twelve more suspected resistance leaders have received deportation orders, a military spokesman said. At least 345 Arabs and 14 Israelis have been killed since the anti-Israel revolt began Dec. 8, 1987. December had the highest casualty toll of any month of the revolt, said the Jerusalem Post daily. Thirty-one Arabs were killed and hundreds were wounded. Three Palestinians died of gunshots in the West Bank on Saturday. On Friday, troops raiding a Gaza Strip hideout killed two Palestinians as they tried to flee; a third Gaza resident was killed when soldiers fired at stone-throwing worshipers after noon prayers. The army on Sunday confined all 650,000 Palestinian residents of the Gaza Strip to their homes and strengthened patrols in an attempt to quell the violence, an army spokesman said. The most senior Palestinian leader among the deportees was Abdallah Abu Samhadaneh, 38, a lecturer at the Islamic University in Gaza whom the army accused of organizing a network of underground popular committees. Also deported was Abdel Hamid Al-Baba, a 25-year-old university student from the Amari refugee camp in the West Bank accused of being a member of the Unified National Leadership of the Uprising, the underground group directing the Palestinian resistance. The army said all the 13 deportees received deportation orders on Aug. 17, 1988. The orders were upheld by the military appeals committees, and the 13 have dropped their appeals to Israel's Supreme Court, it said. The United States and other Western nations have criticized Israel for deporting suspected Palestinian activists. In the occupied territories Sunday, underground Palestinian resistance leaders had called for a ``Day Of Escalation'' to mark Fatah Day, which celebrates formation of Fatah and the group's first anti-Israeli attack on Jan. 1, 1965. The PLO is an umbrella organization for several guerrilla groups, the largest being Arafat's Fatah. Arafat himself participated in a Dec. 28, 1965, guerrilla attack on an Israeli water installation in northern Israel. There were no casualties in that attack. Hundreds of Palestinian youths gathered in at least six West Bank villages to hold parades, an Arab reporter said. The teen-agers were dressed in green and khaki-colored vests and wore masks, the Arab reporter said. In Bethlehem, south of Jerusalem, Palestinians spray-painted pictures of Arafat on the wall and flew illegal Palestinian flags on utility poles, an Arab reporter said. Eight Palestinians were wounded in violent incidents in the West Bank, and a curfew violator was wounded in Gaza, Israel radio said. A 17-year-old from Tulkarem in the West Bank was critically injured by a bullet to the head, an Arab doctor said on condition of anonymity. The army spokeswoman said she was unaware of the injury. Israel captured the territories from Egypt and Jordan in 1967. About 1.5 million Palestinians live there. 
James Dux III, weighing 6 pounds, 15.5 ounces and measuring 20 inches long, greeted the world about three seconds into 1989, becoming one of the nation's first born of the new year. ``Everybody's fine. He's a good eater already,'' said Lorraina Zuba, a nursing supervisor at New Milford Hospital. The parents are MaryAnne and James Dux II, who had been watching New Year's Eve festivities on television prior to the birth. 
Wishing that 1989 will ``be the year of peace, of justice,'' Pope John Paul II on Sunday said respect for minorities and their participation in public life are essential in making a harmonious world. The Roman Catholic church dedicates the first day of the year as ``World Peace Day'' and John Paul, in his sermon during New Year's Day Mass in St. Peter's Basilica, linked achievement of international peace to respect for people of different cultural, religious and ethnic backgrounds. The pope, quoting from the church's official message for World Peace Day, said guaranteeing ``minorities' participation in public life is a sign of elevated civil progress'' and honors ``those nations in which all citizens are guaranteed such a participation in a climate of true liberty.'' He did not cite any specific nations or peoples. In his noontime Angelus prayer immediately following the 1}-hour-long Mass, the pope also made an appeal to the ``consciences'' of all kidnappers to release their victims because ``God is the only master of man's life.'' Diplomats and their wives, some of whom covered their faces with black veils, took communion from the pope. Fifty priests, each taking a chalice filled with consecrated hosts fanned out from the high altar under the Bernini's baroque brass canopy and distributed communion the thousands of others. 
Hundreds of dead birds found along a three-quarter mile stretch of country road may have been poisoned by a pesticide or other chemical, a biologists said. Residents along the road, about four miles south of Austin, first noticed the dead birds Saturday. Hundreds of birds were visible from the road, flapping on the ground or dangling from tree limbs. Hundreds more could be spotted in fields. The varieties included brown-headed cowbirds, Brewer's blackbirds, redwing blackbirds, Eastern meadowlarks, mourning doves, kildeer and a marsh hawk which died shortly after feeding on a dying cowbird. ``I didn't notice them until about 9:30 (a.m. Saturday),'' said Steve Miller, a teacher and bird watcher who lives near the heaviest concentration of corpses. ``I estimate there are at least 2,000 dead or dying.'' Miller said he counted 276 dead birds Saturday in an area roughly the size of an acre in a pasture next to his home. Jack Ralph, a contaminants biologist with the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, said he suspected poisoning, possibly from some type of herbicide, pesticide or related toxin. ``As yet, we can't determine whether this is a natural or man-made event,'' Ralph said. Ralph gathered several of the birds for analysis at a state toxicology laboratory. Test results would be available in about a week, he said. State conservationists scrambled in recent weeks to stem an outbreak of avian cholera that killed more than 2,000 geese along the Texas coast. 
Daniel Curley, an award-winning novelist whose works include ``Mummy'' and ``How Many Angels,'' was killed Friday in a traffic accident on vacation in Florida, authorities said. He was 70. Curley and his wife, Audrey, 56, were hit by a car Friday night as they crossed a street, Tallahassee police said, and Mrs. Curley suffered two broken legs and remained hospitalized. Curley, a University of Illinois professor, won both the Guggenheim and Flannery O'Connor prizes. ``How Many Angels?'' his first novel, and was published in 1958. His most recent, ``Mummy,'' won critical acclaim last year. Another novel was ``A Stone Man, Yes,'' which won two national awards. His story collections included ``That Marriage Bed of Procrustes,'' ``In the Hands of Our Enemies,'' ``Love in the Winter'' and ``Living with Snakes.'' 
Democratic state Sen. Freeman Hankins, who represented west Philadelphia for nearly 28 years until his retirement in November died Saturday. He was 71. Although no cause of death was announced, Hankins had quintuple heart bypass surgery in December 1987 and announced about six weeks later he would retire when the 1988 legislative session ended Nov. 30. A member of the state House of Representatives from 1961 to 1967, Hankins was elected to the state Senate in 1967 and held the seat until his retirement. 
Clare R. Ellinwood, former co-publisher and half-owner of The Arizona Daily Star from 1930 to 1965, died Sunday. She was 92. Mrs. Ellinwood became co-publisher in partnership with William R. Mathews in 1930 when her husband, Ralph E. Ellinwood, died at age 37. After her husband's death, Mrs. Ellinwood played an active role in the planning and building of a plant for the newspaper and in directing the policies of the women's department of the newspaper. 
A fast-spreading fire swept through a home north of here Sunday, killing eight children and the two adults who were baby-sitting them, authorities said. The fire spread so quickly that it was unlikely anyone awakened before being overcome by smoke, said Remer Fire Chief Leo Renn. The bodies were found still on the couches or beds, he said. Elsewhere, fires killed at least six people Sunday, including four who died in an early morning blaze in an Anchorage, Alaska, trailer house. At least three people died in fires on New Year's Eve. The two-story wooden home where 10 died in Minnesota was engulfed in flames when firefighters arrived about 2:10 a.m., authorities said. ``It's probably the worst situation I've seen where 10 people are killed at one time,'' said Cass County Sheriff Jim Dowson. ``It's just devastating,'' he said. John and Nancy Watson, the owners of the house, returned home to find their four children, two nieces, two neighbor children and the two adults had been killed. The dead were identified as the Watson's four children, Jenny, 14, Samantha, 11, Edward, 9, and William, 8; Mrs. Watson's sister and brother-in-law, Jean and Becky Smischney; their two children, Jay, 10, and Kimberly, 8; and the two neighbor children, Michelle and Robin Bastle, ages unknown. The home is in a rural area about one mile north of Remer, which is 20 miles southwest of Grand Rapids in north-central Minnesota. The Watsons were ``hysterical, out of control,'' when they arrived after the fire, Renn said. They had to be sedated and taken to a hospital. The fire spread in minutes, said John Watson's step-sister, Tammy Grover, 18. ``They (the Watsons) just went into town for 20 minutes to get a pack of cigarettes and it just started in that short of time,'' Miss Grover said. Renn said a wood-burning stove and a fuel-oil space heater were each being investigated as possible causes of the blaze. He said lives probably would have been saved if the house had been equipped with smoke detectors. In Maine, an 11-year-old boy was arrested and charged with murder in an apartment fire that killed a 53-year-old man in the southern city of Biddeford on Saturday night, officials said. And in Portland, Maine, a mother and her infant daughter were killed in a house with a defective smoke detector on New Year's Eve, officials said. Victims of the Anchorage trailer fire Sunday were not immediately identified, but police said they were two adults and two children. The early-morning blaze, which was quickly extinguished, ``appears to have been an accidental fire that started in the living room area,'' said Don Barlow, a spokesman for the Anchorage Fire Department. Seven people died in fires in Anchorage during all of 1988, Barlow said. In Wisconsin, New Year's Day fires killed one person in a Waukesha hotel room and another in a Racine residence. One man died in a fire in his room at the Waukesha Hotel about 3:30 a.m. Sunday, said Assistant Fire Chief Wayne Grauer. In Racine, firefighters responding to a report of a blaze early Sunday at a two-story home found a badly charred body, believed to be that of a woman who lived there, a fire department spokesman said. 
Gerry Adams, the president of the Irish Republican Army's legal political wing Sinn Fein, has criticized the guerrilla group for killing civilians in bungled bombings. ``My view is quite clear. I think the onus is on the IRA to safeguard the civilians from injury and death,'' Adams was quoted as saying in an interview with Sunday Life, a Belfast newspaper. Nineteen civilians have died in a series of botched IRA operations in the last 14 months. The outlawed IRA prides itself on targeting the security forces while sparing civilians in its fight to oust the British from Northern Ireland, and the blunders have drawn criticism even from some IRA supporters. Last July, Adams called on the IRA to ``get its house in order'' after a bomb exploded prematurely outside a West Belfast swimming pool, killing two of his Roman Catholic constituents. In the interview published Sunday, Adams, a member of the British Parliament, reiterated his view that the IRA ``must avoid circumstances and conditions in which civilians and non-combatants will be killed or injured.'' ``I think the onus is always on the IRA to do that,'' he said. ``The other forces can kill civilians as a matter of policy but the IRA cannot.'' In November 1987, an IRA bomb killed 11 Protestants attending a memorial service to Britain's war dead in Enniskillen, 65 miles southwest of Belfast, sparking international condemnation of the IRA. The IRA claimed British electronic scanners may have triggered the bomb prematurely. In another admitted blunder, a bomb intended to kill a judge instead killed a Protestant couple and their 6-year-old son as they drove home from a U.S. vacation last July. 
President Fidel Castro vehemently reaffirmed his hardline socialist principles Sunday in a nationally televised speech marking the 30th anniversary of his communist revolution. ``Today, we say with more force than ever: socialism or death, Marxism-Leninism or death!'' Castro said. The speech, which carried one of Castro's strongest declarations of ideological purity, comes at a time of new challenges in ties with the Soviet Union, Africa, and Latin America. Cuba's ties with the Soviet Union appear to have entered a period of uncertainty as a result of ideological differences. On other fronts, Cuban diplomats say a visit here by Pope John Paul II may be possible in 1989, and Cuba has hinted that it wants a more constructive relationship with the United States. As part of the anniversary celebrations this weekend, Castro gave his speech Sunday night in the main square of the eastern coastal city of Santiago. He spoke for almost two hours from the balcony of the building where he proclaimed victory for his guerrilla forces on New Year's Day, 1959. A large crowd gathered to hear him in Cespedes plaza next to the building, which is now used as the city hall. Castro told them he was maintaining strict adherence to socialist principles because of the ``enormous responsibility'' Cuba has to the peoples of the Third World. He devoted much of his speech broadcast on state-run television, however, to praising the role played by the people of Santiago and other eastern cities in his revolution and Cuba's independence from Spain in 1902. The Cuban leader considers this city, from which he led his communist guerrillas into revolution, the moral capital of this communist country. On New Year's Eve 1958, Castro ousted a rightist dictatorship, touching off a revolution that has made him the undisputed leader of this Soviet-allied Caribbean nation. But the Cuban-Soviet friendship, although far from breaking up, seems more tenuous now than it has been in decades. A key question is whether Soviet unhappiness with the way Cuba has used economic aid from the Kremlin _ estimated at $5 billion annually _ will lead to cutbacks. Castro has used the economic aid to help build his country's schools and hospitals, the Soviets say, and has neglected industrial development. Castro is an advocate of socialist purity and opposes any policy that borrows from capitalism. He has spoken scornfully of the political and social reforms proposed by Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev, saying the ``consequences would be hard'' for Cuba if the Soviet experiment encounters ``serious difficulties.'' ``So we may be in for difficulties coming from the enemy camp and difficulties coming from the camp of our own friends,'' he said last month. The recent Cuban commitment to withdraw its 50,000 troops from Angola by 1991 presents another step toward scaling back Cuba's involvement in international conflicts. Cuba has given military support to many countries, but the commitment to Angola was by far the biggest. In Latin America, Castro has been aggressively pursuing interests common to other countries in the area. The evolution of democracy in Latin America, which has been welcomed by the Reagan administration, has also had the ironic side effect of opening diplomatic opportunities for Castro. The Cuban leader, once known for his efforts to promote violent revolution, now seems more interested in pursuing normal ties with elected governments. Castro attended presidential inagurations in Ecuador and Mexico in recent months and may participate in the inauguration of the Venezuelan president next month. During Castro's visit to Mexico in late November, his first since he was exiled there in the 1960s, he said he envisions the eventual unity of Cuba and the rest of Latin America. ``One day, we will make one big giant,'' he said. Western diplomats say Castro may be hoping to gain from the growing restiveness over the devastating social consequences of Latin America's $420 billion foreign debt, which has left the region much poorer than it was a decade ago. Castro has long advocated that Latin America renounce its debt on grounds it is unpayable. Meanwhile, Castro has indicated interest in a more relaxed relationship with the United States. In remarks to the National Assembly last week, he said he would not neglect any opportunity to improve U.S.-Cuban relations. A potential obstacle to an accommodation with Washington is the U.S. plan to beam to Cuban audiences a televised version of Radio Marti, a station operated by the Voice of America whose anti-communist programs are already heard in Cuba. The proposal has drawn an angry reaction from Castro, but he has not said specifically how he would retaliate. 
FBI Director William Sessions, anticipating a long investigation into the crash of Pan Am Flight 103 in Scotland, said Sunday he welcomes any information PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat can provide. Arafat ``has a great deal of information, a wealth of information he can give us,'' Sessions said. The FBI director added that contacts between the FBI and the leader of the Palestinian Liberation Organization presumably could be set up by the State Department. U.S. and PLO officials recently opened talks after Arafat disavowed terrorism and recognized Israel's right to exist. Sessions, interviewed on ABC's ``This Week with David Brinkley'' and on NBC's ``Meet the Press,'' said it may take a long time to discover who is responsible for the jetliner crash. 
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher distanced herself Sunday from American vows to punish those who killed 270 people by planting a bomb on Pan Am Flight 103. ``I don't think an eye for an eye and tooth for a tooth is ever valid,'' she said in a wide-ranging New Year's television interview. ``The most important thing to do is to try to get the cooperation of all nations to track these people down so that they are brought to justice,'' she said on the ``David Frost on Sunday'' program on the commercial TV-am channel. The danger of revenge, she said, is that ``it can affect innocent people.'' 
New Year's fireworks left thousands homeless in the Philippines, and 49 revelers in Rio drowned en route to a pyrotechnics display. The superpowers swapped warm salutations, but a one-sided truce failed to silence the guns in Afghanistan. The new year came in as the old one went out, with promises of peace and bursts of tragedy. Children orphaned by an earthquake got new toys, one Korea offered a tentative olive branch to the other, five Hindus were massacred as they prayed, and the lights went out in Lima for the second New Year's Eve in a row. Thousands poured into streets and squares to celebrate the arrival of 1989, from Times Square in New York to Orchard Road in Singapore on the other side of the globe. 
Federal regulators, by rescuing or closing a post-Depression record of 217 insolvent savings institutions in 1988, have written a check for $38 billion with money they do not yet actually have. Now it's up to Congress and the administration of President-elect Bush to make sure the check doesn't come back marked ``insufficient funds.'' Not since the Depression year of 1938, when 277 S&amp;Ls went under, has a greater number failed. Twenty-two of the 1988 rescues, requiring nearly $6 billion in government aid, came in a frenzied, 48-hour spending spree that ended late Saturday, just hours before the new year began. 
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist threw his weight Sunday behind an effort to boost federal judges' salaries by 51 percent to $135,000 a year. Rehnquist, in his 1988 year-end report on the federal judiciary, strongly endorsed a presidential commission's recommendation of hefty pay raises for judges and about 2,000 other top federal officials. In addition to calling for the big pay raise for the trial judges, who now make $89,500, the commission recommended boosting salaries of federal appeals court judges from $95,000 to $140,000, a 47 percent jump; of Supreme Court associate justices from $110,000 to $165,000, a 50 percent increase; and of the chief justice from $115,000 to $175,000, a 52 percent increase. The recommendations are pending before President Reagan, who can accept or modify the figures before sending his fiscal 1990 budget to Congress on Jan. 9. 
The jury is still out on Ronald Reagan, but history is likely to regard him as an average to good president, according to some scholars of the presidency. With little time left in Reagan's final term, The Associated Press interviewed eight presidential scholars including specialists in history, political science and social psychology. Their tentative verdict: Reagan will get high marks for his use of the White House pulpit to unite the country and will get credit for improving East-West relations even though Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev may have been more responsible for it than he. ``My view is that he will be viewed by the American people as an above-average president,'' said Thomas Cronin, a historian of the presidency at Colorado College who calls himself a moderate Democrat. ``I think the historians and biographers will treat him a little bit more harshly, still ranking him at least an average president but not as high as the American people now do or will.'' But Daniel Franklin, a professor of political science at Colgate University who is critical of many Reagan policies, said, ``I think, in the historical sense, somewhere down the road, that Reagan will be considered as a somewhat worse than average president because of the problems that he has left us.'' If the economy turns sour in the wake of his administration's record budget and trade deficits, Reagan may go down in history like Calvin Coolidge as a president who failed to take action to stave off coming disaster. Some scholars said Reagan's reputation will also suffer from scandals in his administration and from his failure to deal effectively with such social ills as the plight of the homeless. ``I think probably in the short range reaction in the next five or 10 years, even liberal and radical historians will find something good to say about him and that will be that he somehow represented a kind of quality of Americanism and a sense of national unity and he projected that from the White House,'' said Herman Belz, a neo-conservative historian at the University of Maryland. ``Whether or not in the long run our relations with the Soviets will be so good that people will always say it started in the fall of 1988 under Ronald Reagan I don't know, but it would certainly look that way,'' said Vaughn Davis Bornet, professor emeritus of history at Southern Oregon State College and a self-described moderate Republican. Edward W. Chester, a conservative historian at the University of Texas, said it is too early to evaluate Reagan. But, echoing many of his academic colleagues, he said, ``The deficit does bother me. The deficit does bother me.'' ``I think we can say history will probably look most kindly upon him not necessarily for any substantive policy changes that he brought about but for the tone that he brought to the office and for a renewed sense of national pride,'' said Charles W. Dunn, a former Republican congressional aide who teaches political science at Clemson University and has written widely on the presidency. Austin Ranney, chairman of the Department of Political Science at the University of California at Berkeley, said, ``On just the externalities of it, I think Reagan's presidency, with one huge `if,' will probably go down as one of the most successful ones certainly in this century and maybe ever.'' However, comparing Reagan with one of the predecessors the president most admires, Ranney also said that ``Reagan may go down in history pretty much the way Coolidge did'' if some economists' predictions of economic collapse come true. ``Coolidge is not seen now as a successful president followed by Hoover, a bum, but as a president whose do-nothing policies led to the huge crash of the early '30s that Hoover was the victim of,'' he said. Dean Keith Simonton, a professor of psychology at the University of California at Davis who has devised a formula for predicting how history will rate presidents, said, ``When you put all the pros and all the cons in the equation, Ronald Reagan comes out as a slightly above average president.'' One of the ``pro'' factors for Reagan, said Simonton, is the improvement in U.S.-Soviet relations that he and Gorbachev have forged. ``He gets nice points for that in foreign policy when actually he didn't take the initiative for that,'' Simonton said. ``In all fairness, Gorbachev deserves more credit than he does,'' said Colorado College's Cronin. ``Still,'' said Southern Oregon's Bornet, ``Ronald Reagan stepped forward as usual and managed to pin it on himself and that's going to be hard to erase, I'll tell you.'' Clemson's Dunn, similarly, argued, ``A good leader also must seize the opportunity, and Gorbachev offered an opportunity to play for high stakes in the international arena. He seized that; he was not frozen in place by rigid ideology, and thus I think one has to give him credit.'' From Berkeley, Ranny said the relaxation of East-West tensions was the most important of Reagan's accomplishments in foreign policy. ``Now you might say that's because he got lucky and had Gorbachev there, and I wouldn't quarrel with that,'' he said. ``Nevertheless, it did happen. And I think when historians look back at that, they will say that he was in terms of foreign policy one of the most successful postwar presidents that we have had.'' Psychologist Simonton said one big factor working in Reagan's favor is the simple fact that he was the first president since Dwight Eisenhower to serve eight years. ``The longer you serve the more events happen that can be credited to you, whether or not you are responsible for them,'' he said. ``You make a thick chapter in the history of America under your name.'' Although Reagan recently pictured himself as the adversary of a ``Washington colony'' protecting special interests at the expense of ordinary citizens, some scholars argued that one of his own chief shortcomings is his failure to be an advocate for those on the outside. 
``There will be a feeling that he was largely indifferent to those without voice in Washington, that he responded much more to upper middle class and middle class America,'' said Cronin. ``The presidency ought to be a place which raises its voice on behalf of those who don't have the powerful lobbies.'' Cronin is self-described as a Democrat with a liberal viewpoint compared with Reagan's, but the more conservative Chester agreed, ``I also think Reagan could perhaps have done more for the homeless.'' The Iran-Contra affair and the investigations and indictments that have marked Reagan's administration also will cast their shadow, the scholars said. ``The people will forget that quickly; the historians won't,'' said Cronin. ``The historians will have chapters on the sleaze stuff and they'll call it as bad or equal to the Watergate mess.'' Some who praised Reagan highly on other grounds conceded he was not as attentive as he should have been to his duties. ``He didn't keep his ear to the ground enough and he didn't have enough interest in political life, the warp and woof of it, to do as good a job as he could have,'' said the neo-conservative Belz. In strikingly similar language, Ranny said, ``I imagine he loses a few points because of the large number of scandals and indictments and things like that,'' and Simonton said that ``he is probably going to get some negative points'' because of such troubles. In comparing Reagan with past presidents, scholars cited the names ranging from Eisenhower to Lyndon Johnson. ``Personality and character issues for 20 years have overwhelmed evaluation of Lyndon Johnson as president and if that's any precedent, then maybe for several decades it will be difficult to get down to serious business with Ronald Reagan,'' said Bornet, who has written extensively on Johnson. Johnson, he said, ``is still the crude, cornpone president, and Reagan is going to continue to be for a long time this image people watched on TV and this person the press correctly portrayed as essentially a lazy president.'' As for Eisenhower, he has undergone a re-evaluation in recent years, with scholars believing him a much more activist president than first believed. Ranney said, ``If future scholarship finds out that behind the scenes and when the truth is known Reagan himself was also a much more hands-on active president than we now believe _ and incidentally it is unlikely that they will find that _ he might undergo the same kind of upgrading.'' Dunn, however, said, ``Definitely a comparison of Eisenhower and Reagan is in order. Eisenhower had a very subtle style of leadership that evidently caused him to lead more effectively than most people thought he was leading. Reagan's leadership I don't think will come off as that kind of subtle hidden hand leadership so much as it has been leadership through orchestration of symbols and movement of the public mind.'' On the other hand, the Clemson political scientist said, Reagan may also be in for the kind of scaling down of his reputation that John F. Kennedy has suffered as the force of his personality recedes. ``There is no longer the Camelot mystique to Kennedy; a lot of that has worn off,'' he said. ``I suspect that with Ronald Reagan there will be a little bit of wearing off of the mystique that surrounds him.'' 
Where most people list their job experiences, Operation Rescue founder Randall Terry's resume brags, ``Arrested 26 times in seven cities.'' Terry complains it's out-of-date. ``It might be closer to 30 right now,'' the 29-year-old activist said during an interview at the unmarked storefront office in upstate New York where the latest protests against abortion are being planned. Since its national debut at the Democratic National Convention in Atlanta last summer, Operation Rescue has made abortion a high-profile issue again. Terry and his followers have blocked women from entering abortion clinics throughout the country, lying in front of doors until police carry or drag them away under the watchful eye of television cameras. Terry says he is trying to produce the ``social tension'' necessary to change abortion laws by using the non-violent 1960s civil rights protest as a model. ``He's the Martin Luther King of a movement,'' said Dominick Brignola, an Albany lawyer and footsoldier in the anti-abortion drive. Terry's critics claim Operation Rescue, so named because followers try to ``rescue'' the unborn, is an assault on women's rights. ``The civil rights movement was trying to gain rights for people. They're trying to take away the rights of living, breathing human beings,'' said Molly Yard, president of the National Organization for Women. More than 450 anti-abortion demonstrators clogged Atlanta jails during the five-day Democratic convention. Since then, demonstrations have spread to New York City, Indianapolis, Milwaukee, Detroit, Philadelphia and Boston and still more cities. The activists want the Supreme Court to overturn Roe vs. Wade, its 1973 decision that allows women to have abortions. An estimated 1.6 million women have abortions each year in the United States. Standing at the forefront of Operation Rescue is a used car salesman who once wanted to be a rock star. Terry and his wife, Cindy, began their crusade in 1984 by standing in front of abortion clinics, trying to talk women out of entering. Friends soon joined them, and the couple opened an office that offered women free pregnancy tests and hand-me-down baby clothes. ``God clicked a light on in my head and said it wasn't enough to just be against child-killing, that I had to do something about it,'' said Terry, who's selling his auto dealership because he is too busy with Operation Rescue. Critics concede Terry has a mesmerizing personality. He even tries to convert relatives at family reunions, said Dawn Marvin of Rochester, his aunt. Terry was reared in a low-key Protestant environment but quit high school at 17, dreaming of a career in music, said Marvin, who is communications director for the Rochester chapter of Planned Parenthood, a medical service that anti-abortion pickets frequently target. She stressed that she does not speak for the organization about her nephew. ``He went away and he flipped out,'' she said about Terry's transformation into a born-again Christian. ``He came back a totally changed personality. It was more like a cult reaction than a spiritual quest.'' Marriage and his highly public role as Operation Rescue spokesman have calmed him somewhat, she said. The Terrys have one child and three foster children. Terry dismisses his aunt's comments _ including her assessment that ``he's an egomaniac,'' lapping up news media attention. To Margaret Johnston, administrator at Southern Tier Women's Services in Binghamton, Operation Rescue is nothing new. She said anti-abortion activists have spread nails in the parking lot and glued the clinic's door shut four or five times. Terry's first arrest came in January 1986 when he chained himself to a sink at the clinic, which performs abortions. He was jailed for 22 days for refusing to pay a $60 fine. ``It doesn't matter what you say to him. There is no reason involved,'' Johnston said. ``He doesn't care about women. I think he really hates women.'' Iron pipes now prevent cars from blocking the entrance to the Binghamton clinic. A court order keeps the nearly ever-present demonstrators at shouting distance. ``They really want to make it personal,'' Johnston said. Even when she has run into him on a Saturday in the post office, Johnston said Terry has shouted at her, ``How many babies did you murder today?'' Terry criticizes the anti-abortion movement as being ``too nice'' during the 1980s, pacified by the presence of an ideological friend like President Reagan into not working hard for its goal. ``We cry that abortion is murder, it's child-killing, and yet we carry a picket once or twice a year and write a few letters,'' he said. ``That's not an adequate response to murder. A logical response to murder is physical intervention on behalf of the victim.'' The lean, bushy-haired Terry expects and even hopes his demonstrators will be arrested. He claims Operation Rescue was responsible for 11,000 arrests in 1988 and predicts 500,000 will be arrested in 1989. There are no situations, he said, when abortions are justified. ``In most areas of life it's OK for people to follow their own beliefs, but not when it comes to having innocent children murdered,'' he said. ``That's like saying, `Why can't a white man follow his own conscience concerning owning a black slave? Why can't a German follow his own conscience if he decides he wants to shoot Jews?''' Terry has attracted some prominent supporters, including former presidential candidate Pat Robertson, who said he backs ``any means short of violence'' to stop abortion. If anti-abortion demonstrators set their minds to it, Terry said, they could change abortion laws in six months because the political system is not built to deal with mass protests. Yard dismisses Terry as a ``puppet'' groomed for the role of point man in the latest anti-abortion offensive. ``Women are really outraged by the whole thing,'' she said. ``The reason they have been passive seemingly in the light of bombings (of abortion clinics) and Operation Rescue is that people don't believe Roe vs. Wade can be overturned. ... I'm not so sanguine. All I know is we have to make the biggest outcry we possibly can.'' At Operation Rescue's office, a competing outcry is being plotted. Pinned to the wall is a large map of the United States, with ``abortion mills'' dotted in red. Terry distractedly complains to a staff member about a plane flight later that afternoon that will take him to a television appearance. As a photographer snaps pictures, he removes his foot from his desk, saying ``that's too casual for someone trying to change world history.'' He adds, chuckling: ``It's comical, really. I think God has a sense of humor. Don't you think it's rather funny that a former used car salesman is heading such a movement?'' 
Faced with the choice of trying to kick heroin or going back to jail, Jon Parker fought his way 14 years ago from the murky world of Boston's shooting galleries to the academic heights of Yale University. Now he's back on the streets. He again faces a possible jail term, but this time he's charged with illegally handing out clean needles to people he used to run with _ many of whom already have contracted AIDS by sharing dirty needles. Parker, 33, said he doesn't want to go to jail, but he's willing to risk it to try to change the Massachusetts requirement for a prescription to buy a hypodermic syringe. ``People look down on addicts, but it's through them that AIDS is going to spread to the heterosexual community,'' he says. ``People are going to have to realize that.'' Parker is founder of a 50-member organization called the AIDS Brigade, which includes Yale graduate students as well as former addicts and convicts. It was formed about four years ago and distributes AIDS education materials, bleach and needles in New Haven, Conn., New York City, New Jersey and Boston. Critics say he's a renegade, too far from mainstream efforts to curb the spread of AIDS, most often transmitted through homosexual contact and shared needles. ``I think clean needles clearly is one way of addressing the problem for addicts. It would be nice if they were available, but they're not, so we do what we can through other aspects,'' said Brianne Comella, director of Project Trust, supported by city and state funds. Project Trust volunteers distribute bottles of bleach and show addicts how to sterilize needles. ``I think that there is an absolute need for fringe groups such as the AIDS Brigade to push the system. Unfortunately, I think that they could be more effective if they worked with existing programs rather than as Lone Rangers,'' Ms. Commella said. State health officials estimate there are about 40,000 addicts in Massachusetts, and about one-third are believed to be carrying the AIDS virus. Mayor Raymond Flynn backed a needle exchange program, but it was rejected by the City Council. Dr. George A. Lamb, first deputy commissioner for the Boston Department of Health and Hospitals, supported the attempt at a needle exchange program and said he will testify at Parker's trial, which he hopes will revive interest in the program. Addicts meet AIDS Brigade workers in dingy restaurants and on street corners to get their sets of needles, known as ``the works.'' Parker makes rounds of the neighborhoods where the people he tries to help live, such as Jenny, who used to shoot dope with Parker 18 years ago, but now is trying to stay clean. A thin, pale woman in her 30s with dark circles under her eyes, Jenny spoke at her apartment on condition her last name wasn't used. She tested positive for the AIDS virus last summer, and she's sure she contracted the disease through sharing dirty needles. ``The works are hard to get,'' Jenny says. Parker was arrested this summer and charged with illegal possession of hypodermic syringes, which he buys legally in Vermont. The charge is a misdemeanor, but Parker requested a jury trial, which will probably take place this spring. ``I want to show that this is the logical answer to stop the spread of AIDS,'' Parker said. His attorney, Arnold Abelow, plans a ``necessity defense,'' saying that illegally handing out the needles is justified by the need to curb AIDS. But prosecutors say having a reason for doing something doesn't excuse an offense. ``We're only kidding ourselves to think (addicts) are going to go out and only use the needle once,'' said First Assistant Attorney Paul Leary of the Suffolk County District Attorney's office. Parker says his personal history makes him a better judge of how addicts are likely to respond. He shot heroin as a teen-ager and robbed drug stores for money and supplies. At 17, he served more than two years time, earning his high school equivalency diploma in jail. A month after his release, in 1974, he was caught violating parole and given the choice of checking into a drug rehabilitation center or going back to jail. He chose reform. Since then, Parker has worked a variety of jobs, including driving a cab and a few bouts as a local boxer, to get money to help pay his way through Hampshire College in Amherst, where he studied biology, and then to Yale's School of Epidemiology and Public Health, where he is completing work on a masters degree in public health. He says he wants other addicts to have the same chance he did. 
Uniformed men beat up Cecilio Aguilar beneath an avocado tree, marched him and two friends down a wooded path and pounded them to death with rifle butts, witnesses say. Leftist guerrillas captured Francisco Diaz as he was searching for three wayward cows, took him away and shot him. The killings are examples of the growing toll of politically motivated slayings in El Salvador in 1988 as both sides in a 9-year-old civil war grow frustrated with a stalemate. The Roman Catholic Church's Legal Aid office has counted 181 summary killings in the first 11 months of 1988, compared with 129 in all of 1987. Catholic Archbishop Arturo Rivera Damas said during his homily Sunday that altogether 1,369 civilians, soldiers or leftist rebels were killed last year in military clashes, rightist death squad operations and car bombings or other terrorist acts. The war has claimed an estimated 65,000 lives since it began. ``It is so hard to see any sort of light,'' said a church worker who has spent nearly two decades in Morazan, an eastern province divided between guerrillas and government forces. ``It's so disheartening because you had the feeling things were getting better. And now you feel them going backward, getting worse,'' the worker said on condition he not be identified. When the uniformed men had finished killing Cecilio, they went back to his house to demand food and his weapon. His mother could give them only tortillas. ``They said he was a guerrilla. But my son had no weapon, only a machete,'' said Dominga Aguilar. In her one-room mud brick home, she recounted through sobs the events of Nov. 12, when men she described as government soldiers swept into this hamlet. Francisco Diaz was the former mayor of another small town, Lolotique, 12 miles from Piedra Luna. He was searching for cows with his brother Dec. 6 when leftist guerrillas captured him, his wife said. They killed him for what they said was his complicity in a U.S.-imposed counterinsurgency plan. The cases in Lolotique and Piedra Luna, a village of a dozen households 90 miles east of San Salvador, are not unique. Respect for human rights improved steadily from 1984 until 1988. The early 1980s were a time of slaughter when soldiers and rightist death squads were blamed for the slayings of about 30,000 people. The United States, which has provided more than $3 billion in aid this decade, told Salvadoran authorities in 1983 that support would dry up if the rights situation did not improve. Salvadoran authorities say the government no longer has any ties with right-wing death squads. The leftist guerrillas have killed eight mayors and 32 other civilians in 1988 for allegedly collaborating with the army. The Catholic Legal Aid office blames the army for 90 summary executions of suspected guerrilla collaborators. Death squads are blamed for 51 murders. The slayings of Aguilar, 17, Hernan Benitez, 18 and Dolores Pineda, 24, devastated their families, the community council they all sat on and the village soccer team. Benitez was the goalie, Aguilar a fullback and Pineda a midfielder. Benitez died with his soccer shoes on. ``I won't play ever again,'' his mother, Amalia, quoted him as saying as he laced up the cleats before being taken away. ``He knew. He lifted the dog's front paws and danced with him. He kissed the baby and said, `This is it, Ma. I'm saying goodbye,''' she said. Those who took them away were government soldiers, six witnesses said. Hernan's mother said the officer in charge repeatedly accused the family of setting corn aside for the guerrillas. Arturo Rivera Damas, archbishop of San Salvador, also has blamed army troops for the Piedra Luna killings and called for an investigation. Lt. Col. Oscar Leon Linares denied army responsibility. He blamed the guerrillas, claiming they wanted to discredit the armed forces. He said army records show no troops near Piedra Luna on Nov. 12. He denied a request to see the records, saying they were classified. He said the case is closed. Aguilar's 15-year-old brother has been a guerrilla for a year, Mrs. Aguilar said. Benitez's father was detained for four days in October, and _ according to his family _ he was severely beaten and accused of guerrilla sympathies. The three young men, though perhaps not outright collaborators, maintained friendly relations with rebels who pass through regularly, villagers said. The community council they sat on functions with tacit guerrilla approval. When the guerrillas kill civilians, they usually announce it on their clandestine Radio Venceremos. The radio announced Dec. 9 that Diaz, the former mayor, was found guilty of ``crimes against the people.'' He was the secretary-general of the governing Christian Democratic Party in Lolotique. He had been kidnapped by the guerrillas for five months in 1985. ``We explained to him how mayors are tools for the implementation of the counterinsurgency plan ... but he did not obey, and continued implementing the plan in Lolotique,'' said the broadcast. ``He helped whomever he could,'' said his widow, Blanca, in their home. The room where she sat contained a sort of shrine _ a crucifix and her husband's photograph surrounded by flowers in coffee cans. ``Maybe they killed him for helping the community,'' she said, a tear tracking down her cheek. 
When a U.S. ambassador sat down with a PLO delegation for the first official meeting in 13 years, Sweden scored a triumph for a foreign policy variously described as magnanimous or meddlesome. For a small country, Sweden is engaged in other people's troubles to a surprising degree. ``Some people call it international meddling or giving unsolicited advice,'' said Pierre Schori, the Cabinet secretary who is the Foreign Ministry's No. 2 official. But Sweden sees its foreign diplomacy as central to its own well-being. ``Our security has not only to do with our borders. It also is affected by the international climate,'' Schori said. Increasingly, neutral Sweden is being used as a communications channel for parties who can't talk to each other. On Dec. 16, the same day the U.S. ended its formal boycott of the PLO, Sweden's ambassador to Syria, Rolf Gauffin, was instrumental in mediating the release of Peter Winkler, a Red Cross delegate who was kidnapped Nov. 17 by a Palestinian faction in Lebanon. Sweden's approach to world affairs, sometimes criticized as moralistic and preaching, has created some ill feeling, particularly in Israel but also in the United States. The late Prime Minister Olof Palme was blacklisted from the White House for his outspoken opposition to the Vietnam War after he marched through Stockholm with North Vietnamese leaders. ``We believe strongly in human rights, international law and the resolution of conflicts,'' Schori said in an interview in his vaulted 18th century office. ``Our actions are motivated by a combination of self-interest and solidarity.'' The U.S.-PLO dialogue was a personal victory for Foreign Minister Sten Andersson, who worked in secret for nine months to nudge Palestinian Liberation Organization chief Yasser Arafat to meet U.S. conditions for ending its ban on contacts with his organization. ``The PLO success was the climax of a long process,'' Schori said. ``But the positions were blocked, and what was needed was a midwife. Somebody had to take the initiative. Sten Andersson saw that.'' Andersson, a wily politician with little foreign experience, came to the Foreign Ministry in 1985 after nearly 20 years as secretary of the dominant Social Democratic Party and three years as health minister. He brought with him the typically Swedish approach that any problem is solvable by discussion among reasonable men. Sweden, which allocates 1 percent of its gross national product to foreign aid, also has provided a pool of experienced diplomats for international service. Bernt Carlsson was U.N. Commissioner for Namibia. He died in Dec. 21 Pan Am plane crash in Scotland while on his way to New York to observe the signing of an agreement for Namibian independence from South African rule. Jan Eliasson, Sweden's U.N. ambassador, was tapped by Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar on Sept. 1 to lead Iran-Iraq peace negotiations. In less public roles, Swedish diplomats have been conduits for contacts between rival factions in Nicaragua and El Salvador, among others, Schori said. Last year the Swedes persuaded Cuba to allow the Red Cross to visit prisoners in Cuban jails. Sweden's international activity goes back a long way. Prime Minister Karl Branting won the 1921 Nobel Peace Prize for his work with the League of Nations. It has contributed 55,000 men to U.N. peacekeeping forces, which were created by the U.N. Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold, a Swede. Count Folke Bernadotte, a member of Sweden's royal family, was the U.N.'s first martyr. He was assassinated by Jewish extremists in pre-independence Palestine in 1948. Four years earlier, diplomat Raoul Wallenberg distributed Swedish passports to Hungarian Jews threatened with deportation to Nazi death camps. He was credited with saving 100,000 lives before Soviet forces arrested him at the close of the war and he disappeared. The Soviets say he died in prison in 1947, but his family is convinced he is still alive. Gunnar Jarring, appointed special U.N. emissary to the Middle East after the 1967 Six-Day War, earned a footnote in history as the inventor of shuttle diplomacy, though the credit went later to former U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger. Jarring's mission ended in failure. Schori said the relaxation of U.S.-Soviet tension may usher in a less active period for Sweden. ``There's been a need for bridge-building. Now it's changing,'' he said. ``We have no ambition to be mediators. Where we have a contribution to make, we do all we can. But I see this role declining in an era of detente.'' 
Federal regulators rescued a post-Depression record 217 savings institutions in 1988, leaving Congress and President-elect Bush to figure out the best way to pay the $38 billion bill. Theoretically, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, which regulates the S&amp;L industry, expects enough income over the next 30 years _ $45 billion to $50 billion _ to cover the cost. But analysts and many members of Congress say regulators have run up such a huge bill that turning to the taxpayer is inevitable. ``We still don't know the magnitude of the S&amp;L crisis,'' Senate Republican Leader Bob Dole of Kansas said Sunday. ``We're not even certain what the regulators have been doing the past week, running up a tab of some $40 billion.'' Even with a last-minute spending spree of nearly $6 billion to rescue 22 institutions in the final 48 hours of 1988, regulators still have about 350 more insolvency cases to handle. And, as of last Sept. 30, another 150 savings institutions were sliding toward insolvency with capital levels below 1.5 percent. Estimates of the total cost of paying for the mess run as high as $112 billion, a figure reported last month by the General Accounting Office, Congress' auditing agency. Treasury Department officials are considering a variety of plans for the incoming administration. Most attempt to spread out the burden over time and keep as much as possible from adding to the federal budget deficit. But Dole, in an interview on ABC-TV's ``This Week With David Brinkley,'' said, ``Somebody's going to have to pay. ... We can't hide it by putting it off budget or smoke and mirrors.'' This year's failure and rescue total _ 217 of the 3,100 S&amp;Ls operating at the start of the year _ is more than quadruple last year's total of 48. It is the highest total since a record 277 failures and rescues in the Depression year of 1938. According to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., which insures the nation's 13,500 commercial banks, 221 banks failed or required government assistance. That is also a post-Depression record, topping the previous record of 203 in 1987. Both the FDIC and the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. draw their funds from an assessment on member institutions. But the FDIC depends on the much-larger banking industry, which as a whole is in much better shape, and enters 1989 in relatively good shape with more than $15 billion in reserves. FSLIC, however, is technically insolvent. So, regulators have been patching together rescue deals with as little cash as possible. Most of the aid takes the form of various commitments secured by revenue that regulators don't have now and in some case won't have for as long as 30 years. Moreover, the revenue projections depend on charging S&amp;Ls a special assessment, originally intended to be phased out in a few years, over the next three decades. Industry officials say that would drive even more S&amp;Ls into the red. The biggest rescue on the last day of 1988 was for the Beverly Hills Savings and Loan Association, a giant California institution whose financial problems had plagued regulators for years. The package called for the government to provide $983 million in assistance in the sale of Beverly Hills to Michigan National Corp., a bank holding company in Farmington Hills, Mich., that is putting $52 million into the deal. Also on Saturday, the bank board pledged: _$243.3 million in aid to Home Federal Savings and Loan, a San Diego S&amp;L putting up $25 million to acquire three institutions in the San Francisco area. They are: Columbus Savings and Loan, San Rafael; Cal America Savings and Loan, Walnut Creek, and First Security, Pleasant Hill. _$151.1 million in aid to California Savings and Loan of Los Angeles, which agreed to put up $20.4 million into the insolvent Broward Federal Savings and Loan of Sunrise, Fla. _$29.9 million in aid to First Network Savings Bank of Los Angeles, which agreed to pay $1.25 million for the insolvent Tahoe Savings and Loan of South Lake Tahoe. _$8 million to Home Federal Savings and Loan of Sioux Falls, S.D., which is purchasing United Federal Savings and Loan of Aberdeen, S.D. 
The nation's capital also may be the nation's murder capital. In 1988, 371 people were killed in the District of Columbia, far surpassing the previous high of 287, set in 1969. Police say drugs are mostly to blame. Final population and homicide figures have yet to be compared, but Washington and Detroit had the two highest per-capita murder rates in America in 1988. Thus, the nation's capital, where the federal government's war on drugs is mapped out, could earn the dubious distinction of being the murder capital as well. The District of Columbia's drug problems dramatize the two different Washingtons _ the Capitol, the White House and other sites visited by millions of tourists each year, and the squalid neighborhoods tucked away from the traditional seats of power. There, a more vicious power struggle is contested among teens drawn to the status and money that come from selling drugs. Police say drugs _ particularly the arrival of crack cocaine _ are to blame for about 60 percent of the slayings. As recently as 1986, drug-related killings accounted for just one-third of the city's homicide total. The absence of organized crime in Washington may be a factor in the city's murder rate, officials say. Law enforcement officials say that in cities where organized crime factions control the drug market, there are fewer drug-related slayings. ``What you have here is a lot of young entrepreneurs fighting among themselves for drug turf,'' said Police Chief Maurice T. Turner. ``They are just working for themselves.'' Stemming the city's drug tide has become an increasingly tough battle for Turner and his 3,800 officers. Earlier this year, police decided they will switch to .9mm semiautomatic handguns out of fear that weapons commonly found on the street were outclassing the standard .38-caliber six-shot revolver officers have been carrying. The new weapons, which allow officers to fire an extra 10 shots before reloading, were ordered after drug raids frequently resulted in the seizure of Uzi submachine guns and other sophisticated weaponry. Surveying the weapons at a March news conference, Turner called the district's streets ``something out of the wild, wild West.'' Officers will have their new guns by 1990. And police have learned that simply arresting more drug suspects hasn't dulled the city's appetite for narcotics. A highly-touted anti-drug program, Operation Clean Sweep, has produced more than 46,000 arrests since it began in August, 1986. However, Turner has complained that the program, which sends swarms of officers through drug-infested neighborhoods to make arrests, has done little more than further clog the city's already overcrowded jail and court systems. For each drug dealer arrested, another springs forward, according to Turner. ``A lot of these kids are high school dropouts with few skills,'' Turner said. ``They can make up to a $1 million a year selling drugs. What would you do?'' Jay B. Stephens, U.S. Attorney for the District of Columbia, who can prosecute both local and federal crimes, announced in December that he is assigning five senior prosecutors to work solely on drug-related killings in the district. Turner also has called on city officials to spend more money on drug education, prevention and treatment programs. Currently, a three-week wait is common for people wanting to enroll in the city's treatment centers. As for the future, police believe that as markets are more firmly established for crack, a highly-addictive cocaine derivative, the murder rate will decrease. ``This is one of the last major cities in this country to have an infusion of crack,'' Turner said. ``When crack arrived in other cities, like New York, murder rates went up there, too.'' 
Ringing in the new year are dozens of changes in federal laws and regulations, many of them aimed at quenching Americans' thirst for security and a few that will make life a little more expensive. Among the most significant of the Jan. 1 changes are a vast expansion of Medicare to cover catastrophic illnesses, faster pension fund vesting that will benefit millions, particularly women, and tax changes reducing the government's subsidizing of purchases on credit. Others that occurred just before the end of 1988 or are scheduled early in 1989 include a ban on lie detector tests by private employers, 60 days advance notice of plant closings and large layoffs and a new law prohibiting landlords from discriminating against the handicapped and families with children. A few of the changes are a little more esoteric but their impact eventually may be felt by the entire population. For example, Environmental Protection Agency regulations implementing the 46-nation ozone treaty took effect Jan. 1. The regulations don't require chemical companies to actually do anything until next July, but then they must cut their production of chloroflourocarbon or CFC compounds by an estiamted 20 percent back to 1986 levels. The treaty is aimed at halting the depletion of the ozone layer 15 to 25 miles up protecting the earth's surface from ultraviolet rays. CFC compounds also contribute to the ``greenhouse'' effect that is warming the planet. As a result of the regulations, consumers may notice fewer plastic food containers from fast-food outlets, thicker insulating panels and possibly even slightly harder seat cushions. The biggest of the immediate changes is the Jan 1. expansion of Medicare coverage for 32 million Medicare beneficiaries to include catastrophic health care costs. Prior to passage of the measure last summer by Congress _ the first major expansion of Medicare in its 22-year history _ the program paid full hospital bills for no more than 59 days a year. With the changes that took effect Sunday, the beneficiary still will have to pay the first-day deductible of $560. But that charge will be assessed no more than once a year no matter how many times the patient has to be hospitalized. The other 364 days are fully paid. That fundamental change in the hospital benefit was the cornerstone of the Medicare expansion set in motion by President Reagan in his 1986 State of the Union message. ``Let us remove a financial specter facing our older Ameicans _ the fear of an illness so expensive that it can result in having to make an intolerable choice between bankruptcy and death,'' he said then. Medicare enrollees will pay for the new benefits through a flat increase in the premium deducted from their monthly Social Security checks and an additional sliding scale premium for approximately 40 percent of the elderly who pay federal income tax. The flat increase will be $4 a month effective immediately, climbing to $10.20 monthly in 1993. The sliding scale premium is projected to rise from a maximum of 15 percent of regular income tax liability in 1989 to about 28 percent in 1993. Many of the Jan. 1 changes grow out of the 1986 Tax Reform Act. The biggest new benefit from that law is faster vesting in pension plans. The maximum waiting period for employees to become fully invested in a pension is being cut in half from 10 years to five years. However, employers can adopt an option that denies full vesting until seven years. To do so, they have to offer 20 percent vesting after three years and an additional 20 percent vesting annually until the seventh year, when it reaches 100 percent. The Employee Benefit Research Institute estimates that the pension changes will provide a retirement stake to 2 million more workers a year. ``We'll especially see more women being vested than in the past because they tend to be in the workforce or with the same employer for shorter periods,'' said Stephanie Poe, a spokeswoman for the institute. Another tax change is that only 20 percent of personal interest payments on everything from car and student loans to credit card charges will be deductible in 1989, compared with 40 percent last year. And while the government is now raising tax brackets, exemptions and standard deductions to keep cost-of-living raises from bumping people into higher brackets, it also is taking more Social Security taxes. The 7.51 percent Social Security tax took a maximum $3,380 out of employee paychecks in 1988. This year the maximum amount of income subject to the tax rises from $45,000 to $48,000, raising the maximum Social Security tax that can be collected from an individual employee to $3,605. The latest change came about just last Thursday, when the Federal Aviation Administration ordered airlines, effective Jan. 1, to either inspect by hand or X-ray all luggage checked aboard U.S. airline flights from western Europe and the Middle East. The new inspections, prompted by the bombing of a Pan Am jet over Scotland on Dec. 21, are expected to delay passenger check-ins by about an hour. Other changes taking effect slightly before or after New Year's Day include: _ The use of polygraph or lie detector tests by private employers to screen job applicants was outlawed, with some exceptions, effective last Tuesday. The American Civil Liberties Union estimates the law will effectively eliminate about 80 percent of the 2 million polygraph exams now administered annually. _ A 47-year-old ban on homework in five apparel trades is being removed on Jan. 8, unless unions which support the prohibitions win a court stay first. Affected are an estimated 50,000 to 75,000 workers in fields such as mittens and gloves, embroideries, buttons and buckles, handkerchiefs and some jewelry trades. They will be able to work legally at home for the first time if their employers obtain a certficate from the Labor Department after pledging to abide by minimum wage and other federal labor standards. _ A law requiring employers to provide 60 days advance notice of plant closings or layoffs affecting 50 or more people officially takes effect Feb. 4. However, there are different interpretations on whether companies are required to have provided 60 days notice beforehand if they close a plant on that date. The Labor Department advised in early December that, to avoid potential liability, they should. _ Regulations implementing a law passed by Congress last summer forbidding landlords from discriminating against the handicapped or families with children take effect March 12. Violators can be fined up to $10,000 for a first offense, $25,000 for a second violation in a five-year period and $50,000 for two or more violations within a seven-year period. 
The Christmas Day eruption of the snow-capped Lonquimay volcano in southern Chile is gaining in force and seismologists say they expect it to continue for at least another two months. Authorities have issued masks to residents who are remaining in the area to protect them from a thick cloud of ash spewed by the volcano over a sparsely populated area of about 12 square miles. And scientists estimate that 525 million cubic feet of lava have oozed out of the 8,400-foot volcano, toward an uninhabited valley, since the eruption began. Lonquimay, a peak in the Andes foothills about 400 miles south of Santiago, had been dormant for a century when it erupted on Christmas Day. Authorities say the eruption poses no danger for two nearby villages, Lolco and Malacahuello. Residents of both towns quickly evacuated after the eruption, and some later returned home. But many remain lodged at schools and municipal buildings in Curacautin, a city 50 miles away. Authorities on Saturday issued masks to the few residents who had returned to their homes. Researchers, soldiers and police officers also in the area were also wearing the white masks. On Sunday, the volcano continued to spew smoke and lava through a 300-foot-wide crater. The volcano initially showed three separate smaller fissures, but a series of explosions joined them into a single crater, authorities said. Seismologists from the University of La Frontera, in Temuco, the largest city in the region, said a 1,200-foot-wide, 30-foot-high mass of lava is slowly slipping down the volcano. They said the route followed by the lava is the same as the one in the Lonquimay's previous eruption, in 1889, and poses no danger for the population. Livestock in the area were removed to safer zones, police said. 
Outgoing Labor Secretary Ann McLaughlin says her successor needs to carve out a place on President-elect Bush's team of top economic advisers to help solve the nation's competitiveness problem. Mrs. McLaughlin, the only woman in the Reagan Cabinet, said in an interview with The Associated Press, ``On occasion I've felt that we were spending too much time looking backward instead of preparing a human resource policy for the future.'' Bush recently named former Transportation Secretary Elizabeth Dole as the next labor secretary and _ so far _ the only woman in his Cabinet. But he did not give her what Mrs. McLaughlin thinks the labor secretary needs: a designated spot on his top economic team right alongside the heads of the Treasury and Commerce departments and the White House budget office and Council of Economic Advisers. Mrs. McLaughlin, during her 14-month Cabinet stint, sought to heighten business awareness of employee needs such as job retraining, flexible hours and child-care assistance, and emphasized the links between education and competitiveness. ``I see the Labor Department as an economic arm,'' she said. ``I think Bush is headed there. The question is how do we get to the next step.'' ``The name of the game is going to be competitiveness and unless the incoming labor secretary moves in there and ties the human resource issues with the equation ... we're going to have a skills shortage,'' she said. Mrs. McLaughlin, in what she calls her holistic approach to workplace issues, has often complained that too many people in government, labor and business are looking backward and constantly fighting over turf. During her brief tenure, Mrs. McLaughlin spent a good part of her time in those skirmishes, fighting her way into them on occasion and sometimes finding herself on the sidelines. It was on her watch that the AFL-CIO won its first major legislative victories in a decade: a ban on the use of polygraphs or lie detectors by private employers to screen job applicants and mandatory advance notices of plant closings and large layoffs once vetoed by Reagan. With Sens. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, and Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass., forming an uncharacteristic but also unstoppable alliance on the first, Mrs. McLaughlin helped persuade the White House to acquiesce to the polygraph ban rather than continue opposing it on behalf of some business groups. She was relegated to the sidelines on the second, with then-Treasury Secretary James A. Baker III using the plant closing notices as the primary reason for Reagan to veto legislation overhauling the nation's trade laws. When Republican moderates from northern and midwestern states with large blue-collar constituencies wanted to cut a deal last spring in which labor would get advance notices of plant closings but not other layoffs, Baker said no. Four months later, with polls showing that more than 80 percent of voters favored advance layoff warnings, Baker, then Bush's campaign chief, persuaded Reagan to let the notices for both layoffs and plant closings become law without his signature. ``Plant closing was bigger than all of us,'' Mrs. McLaughlin said. ``There was never a time when the plant closing situation was really thought through. If I'm remiss, I suppose I should have hollered louder.'' As the former No. 2 official in the Interior Department, Mrs. McLaughlin relished playing the broker, mediating disputes between environmentalists and oil companies and cutting deals on Alaskan and offshore drilling. She tried the same approach at Labor, finding that while union leaders and business executives spoke glowingly of cooperation, they were often unyielding in practice. ``Organized labor is not there yet in its role of what it can do for itself and this country with regard to training, a quality work force and all the issues of the workplace as we move into the 21st Century,'' she said. ``And they won't be there, in my view, if they continue just to back mandated legislation piecemeal to address workers' needs. ``On the other hand, business isn't there yet either. It will hold the line on legislation, just like labor will push it, instead of finding out what's driving these things,'' she said. Mrs. McLaughlin said she will keep speaking out on child care, flextime, education, drugs _ the human resource issues that she says will determine the nation's economic health in the 1990s. She claimed she is not surprised not to have a role in the new administration, although she had declared her availability early. ``I expected George Bush to find his team, his people,'' she said. ``It's time to leave because I leave on a high. I join a prestigious group of people who were here only a year or two years.'' 
Two residents of a retirement home were beaten to death and four were injured in an attack early New Year's Day, and police detained an 88-year-old man for questioning, authorities said. The man being questioned was regarded as a key witness and was taken into custody Sunday night, said Police Chief Phil Thompson. The man has not been ruled out as a suspect, but no charges have been filed, Thompson said. The two killed in the attack in this central Florida city were Max Nickbarge, 90, and Myrtle Smith, 73. The man in custody shared a room at the house with Nickbarge and with Frank Tear Sr., 89, who suffered a fractured skull and was listed in critical but stable condition Sunday night at Tampa General Hospital, authorities said. Frank Tear Sr. is the father-in-law of Helen Tear, who owns the Reflections I retirement home, where the attacks occurred. The man who was taken into custody was missing when the bodies were found Sunday morning by two nurses, Thompson said. One of the nurses slept through the attacks, which took place between midnight Saturday and 8 a.m. Sunday, Thompson said. Esther Kelly, 67, was in guarded condition Sunday night following surgery at a hospital here, Thompson said. Lucy Mitchell, 85, and Ruth Godfrey, 71, were in fair condition at a hospital in Zephyrhills. 
Steven Bochco is developing a TV series about a teen-age doctor, Jackie Mason is tailoring his comedy show for Britons and Ron Howard is preparing to make Jason Robards and Steve Martin into a father-and-son team. Bochco, one of 36 artists who told The New York Times about their plans for the 1989, said he got some inspiration from his father, who was an accomplished violinist by age 7 or 8. He plans a half-hour series to begin on ABC in September about a 16-year-old doctor. ``It's interesting to think that a 16-year-old kid can't buy a six-pack of beer, but he could write you a prescription for morphine,'' said the writer-producer of ``L.A. Law.'' Mason, whose one-man show ``The World According to Me'' was a hit on Broadway, said he is writing new material about the differences in lifestyles between England and New York for the debut of his show in Britain in February. ``In England, politeness is the accent of the whole culture,'' he said. ``I swear if a guy was drowning, he'd be ashamed to holler `help.''' Howard, whose movie credits include ``Cocoon,'' plans to start filming ``a comedy-drama about several phases of parenthood'' later this month. Robards will play Martin's father, Rick Moranis will play Martin's brother-in-law and Dianne Wiest will play a single mother, he said. ``When you get them all in a room, they actually look like a family,'' Howard said. 
Rep. Hamilton Fish Jr., who was recently re-elected to his 11th term in Congress, married Mary Ann Tinklepaugh Knauss, a deputy assistant secretary of commerce for intergovernmental affairs. The couple were married Saturday at St. Philip's Episcopal Church-in-the-Highlands in Garrison. It was the third marriage for Fish, a 62-year-old Republican who represents New York's 21st District. His previous two wives died. The new Mrs. Fish, a longtime Republican activist, directed the 1980 Reagan-Bush campaign in Connecticut. Her previous marriage ended in divorce. The wedding was the second for a Hamilton Fish this year. Fish's father, Hamilton Sr., the oldest living former member of Congress who turned 100 last month, married his live-in housekeeper in September. 
Tenor Luciano Pavarotti will lead a group of stars in performing with the New York City Opera Orchestra in a benefit for Lincoln Center. Also appearing in the Jan. 9 gala will be Mariella Devia, Kallen Esperian, Shirley Verrett, Pietro Ballo, Thomas Hampson, Sherrill Milnes and Ruggero Raimondi. The artists will perform operatic arias, duets and ensembles with the orchestra. Afterward, they will join guests for a supper party on the promenade of Avery Fisher Hall, which will be decorated as a Renaissance garden of an Italian palazzo with troubadours in medieval costumes. Proceeds of the black-tie event will benefit the center's Great Performers Series. 
The Chicago Bears' Mike Ditka, who refused to be sidelined earlier this season by a heart attack, is the most charismatic coach in the National Football League, according to an informal survey. ``He hurls gum, he's back a couple of weeks after a heart attack, he says outrageous things, he mocks opposing fans and stadiums,'' said the New York Post's Steve Serby, one of 11 writers and broadcasters surveyed by The Houston Post. ``What more do you want?'' The Bears came out as the most charismatic team overall, finishing first in three of the eight other categories in the survey: stadium, unique characters and fans. Orange County Register columnist Mark Whicker said he would ``love to have a few drinks with the Bears _ and watch them fight.'' The runners-up for the charisma title were San Francisco and Washington. The Atlanta Falcons were the most woesome in the charisma leagues, finishing last in seven categories, including the worst uniforms. That vote wasn't unanimous, though. Washington Post columnist Tony Kornheiser said Tampa Bay's uniforms are so bad, their players ``look like clerks at Disney World.'' 
Ants, ants and more ants are marching into San Francisco Bay area homes, crawling up Christmas trees and making themselves a nuisance in unprecedented numbers because of winter's sudden onset. ``They give me the heebie-jeebies. Last night I came back to find the bathtub black with ants,'' said Elizabeth Darling of Menlo Park. The ants, lured by early December's sun and mild temperatures, weren't ready for the recent wet and cold weather. When the weather changed, they went scurrying inside houses, said Joe Neitzel, manager of Rose Exterminator Co. ``I can't remember when it's been this bad. We're being flooded by calls, absolutely flooded,'' said Neitzel. The insects also were lured inside by Christmas trees, which drip sap and are adorned with candy canes, both of which they find irresistible, exterminators said. ``We spray ... everywhere, but it's only a Band-Aid solution. They always come back,'' said Ms. Darling. Exterminators say the Argentine ants _ the Bay area's most common variety _ are hard to get rid of. You may control them for a few weeks, or even months, but the ants will come marching back. ``They were on this planet before us, and they'll definitely outlive all of us,'' said James Pereira of Jackson Pest Control in Novato. ``For people like me, that's what you call job security.'' 
While others were at home nursing hangovers, the Boston Harbor's icy waters were apparently just what the doctor ordered for those who braved an annual New Year's Day swim. ``It was great!'' said Frances Tobin after her first winter swim. ``I said I was going to do it and I did it.'' Forty-nine men and women took to the 29-degree water Sunday morning to celebrate the L Street Brownies swimming club's 85th anniversary. Before they ran down the beach into the water, Paul Levenson, the club's president, apologized to onlookers for ``the mild weather over which we have no control.'' It was 25 degrees. ``Not bad,'' said Al Binari, 55, as he left the water. Many of the swimmers are longtime members of the swimming club headquartered at the L Street Bathhouse in south Boston. Some, like George Graney, 75, Jerry Collins, 82, and Joe Alecks, 77, have been swimming in the harbor year-round for decades. ``We do it for health reasons,'' said Graney. ``It's a discipline. We do it every day, like joggers. Some days we have to chop the ice away before we go in.'' Peter Jurzynski, 37, scoffed at questions about the cleanliness of Boston Harbor, which was an issue in last year's presidential campaign. ``The yuppies go to the Caribbean; we have the crystal clear waters of Boston Harbor,'' Jurzynski said. 
A 17-year-old Czechoslovakian hockey star who wants to play in the National Hockey League was in the custody of Canadian immigration officials when his teammates flew back home Monday, tournament officials said. Peter Nedved had disappeared from his billet's residence early Monday morning. ``He is currently in the hand of the immigration people,'' said Ted Taylor, chairman of the Mac's Midget Hockey Tournament. Taylor said he doesn't know whether the 6-foot-2, 165-pound forward has asked to stay in Canada. Nedved said in a weekend interview he wanted to return to Canada as a visitor but would ``prefer to play here.'' He led the tournament in scoring and his club, Litvinov, won the event. Spokesmen for the Immigration Department could not be reached, and a spokesman for the External Affairs Department in Ottawa said he had no information about Nedved. His father played on Czechoslovakia's national team alongside his current coach Josef Beranek. An older brother also played before being drafted into the army. That fate would await Peter in Czechoslovakia. ``I should have a better chance to play for the national team, every boy hopes to play for it,'' he said through an interpreter. His dream also includes the NHL. ``I don't plan that far ahead,'' he said with a smile. ``But I'll be able to give you a better answer in five years.'' 
The number of police officers who died in the line of duty in 1988 fell slightly to 153, the National Association of Chiefs of Police said Sunday. The national total was 155 the year before. Eight women officers were included in the 1988 total; three women officers died the year before. In 1988, California led the nation with a loss of 23 officers, followed by 21 in Texas, where five died in Dallas alone, and 13 in Florida. Robert Ferguson, president of the association, said many police killers were on alcohol or drugs. Of the officers killed, 75 died of gun shot wounds, 58 in traffic chases and accidents and the rest in plane crashes, stabbings, drownings and other causes in the line of duty. Their average age was 27. Gerald Arenberg, a spokesman for the association, said the 153 deaths included a broad range of law enforcement officials from county sheriff deputies and local police to FBI and corrections officers. The association has maintained an American Police Hall of Fame listing all officers killed since 1960 when 55 died. In 1988, one office died every 57 hours. On average, 157 are wounded or injured every day. 
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist has strongly endorsed a proposal to raise federal judges' salaries by 51 percent to $135,000 a year. In his 1988 year-end report on the federal judiciary, Rehnquist threw his weight behind a presidential commission's recommendation of big pay raises for judges and about 2,000 other top federal officials. Besides calling for the pay raise for trial judges, who now make $89,500, the commission recommended boosting salaries of federal appeals court judges from $95,000 to $140,000, a 47 percent jump; of Supreme Court associate justices from $110,000 to $165,000, a 50 percent increase; and of the chief justice from $115,000 to $175,000, a 52 percent increase. The recommendations are pending before President Reagan, who can accept or modify the figures before sending his fiscal 1990 budget to Congress on Jan. 9. Under the law, whatever pay increases the president endorses will take effect 30 days later unless both the House and the Senate vote to set them aside. ``Over the past two decades, the purchasing power of federal judicial salaries has been seriously eroded by inflation,'' Rehnquist said. The buying power of an appeals court judge's salary has dropped 30 percent in the past 20 years, said the chief justice, adding, ``While the salary of the median household has increased approximately 200 percent to keep pace with inflation since 1969, the salaries of federal (trial) judges rose by little more than half that amount.'' Rehnquist cited a recent American Bar Foundation survey in which 30 percent of the federal judges who responded said they planned to resign before retirement unless ``a significant increase in compensation'' is provided. ``Dozens of federal judges have resigned from the bench during the past 15 years, far more than ever before, due in large part to financial reasons,'' Rehnquist said. ``And the problem appears to be growing worse.'' He said judicial salaries are directly linked to ``the quality of American justice.'' Comparing justice and medical care, Rehnquist said, ``We are interested in receiving the best medical care available. If the quality of medical treatment is poor, it is little consolation that the cost may be low.'' He added: ``The right to one's day in court is meaningless if the judge who hears the case lacks the talent, experience and temperament that will enable him to protect imperiled rights and to render a fair decision.'' 
Deep in the basement of a suburban family home, 220 ferrets from all around the country frolic with toy balls, crawl tubes and other ferret-phernalia in a makeshift halfway house for the weasel-like creatures. The ferrets, unwanted by their owners or between homes, are the pride and joy of Mary Van Dahm, who keeps 14 of her own upstairs. It started 18 months ago when a group of concerned Chicago-area ferret-lovers formed the Greater Chicago Ferret Association. Mrs. Van Dahm, the only founding officer with a basement, was asked to run the association's shelter. She agreed. So when a Chicago woman recently asked her veterinarian what to do with two ferrets her older son had outgrown, she was told to head for the Van Dahm home. There, the ferrets live in cages until a new owner is found. ``We've gotten ferrets from all over the country,'' said Mrs. Van Dahm, who prefers to keep the location of her home a secret so as not to disturb the neighbors. Some were transported from New Jersey. A batch from Kentucky arrived after animal-welfare officials seized 19 ferrets from a Louisville-area woman who kept them in a cramped back-yard shed. Others come from disenchanted owners. ``It was not what I expected,'' one woman said, complaining that her ferret did not like to sit in her lap to be stroked like a cat. ``They are more exotic than dogs or cats,'' Mrs. Van Dahm said. ``They are good for apartment dwellers because they are small and can be kept in cages most of the time. ``They also have a bit of a wild look, and they don't provoke allergies,'' she said. Of the nation's estimated 5 million pet ferrets, about 10,000 live in the Chicago area, said Janice Miller, president of the Greater Chicago Ferret Association based in suburban Westchester. She said the association was formed because ``so much was unknown'' about ferrets. ``We wanted to say, `Hey, these little guys aren't so bad.'' Ferret lovers say the animal's reputation as a sometimes vicious biter is unfounded. They are often mistakenly considered rodents but related to weasels and mink. Like cats, they can be trained to use litter boxes and will eat cat food. ``They have a strong will to survive,'' said Susan Brown, a Westchester veterinarian and another association member. ``They are easy to work with. I'm seldom bitten. In fact, I'm bitten far more often by iguanas and birds.'' 
Not long ago, Parliament was a mere rubber-stamp body that met for just four three-day sessions a year. Now, outspoken deputies are openly demanding accountability from Communist authorities. Live television coverage came to Parliament in September, and its 383 deputies have since begun edging the once-tame forum toward democracy. Increasingly, deputies are bringing into the open formerly taboo subjects such as defense spending. They challenge government and Communist Party leaders to adhere to their avowed policy of openness and disclose facts and figures. The changes, more rapid than political reforms occuring in Mikhail S. Gorbachev's Soviet Union, have prompted rare admissions from Hungary's Communist leadership about how parliamentary work was controlled in the past. Matyas Szueroes, head of the party's parliamentary group, was quoted by the government daily Magyar Hirlap as admitting that Communist leaders once met with deputies to tell them how to vote. On live radio and television, constituents watch closely what one Budapest man termed the ``great theater'' emanating from Parliament's 19th century quarters on the Danube _ and are exercising their own rights as a result. Deputy Karoly Eke says he has received a ``tremendous response'' from constituents since the broadcasts began. Just two days into December's session, he had already received eight letters commenting on his behavior in debates. Deputies now meet often, and debate into the night. In December, Parliament held the year's unprecedented fifth session, the third in as many months. The agenda was so long that speaker Istvan Stadinger announced an unprecedented Christmas recess, with business to resume Jan. 10. Mindful of November's exhausting session, when deputies worked 12 hours a day to get through the agenda, he also limited the length of daily sessions in the high, gilded chamber. The non-Communists who make up 25 percent of the deputies then took another unprecedented step, banding together in a formal group intended as a counterweight to the long-established group of Communist parliamentarians. Judit Benjamin, coordinator for the new group, told Magyar Hirlap it aims to obtain the same information as Communist deputies. The non-Communists include one of the most outspoken deputies, Zoltan Kiraly, a television journalist from southern Hungary who was expelled from the Communist party earlier this year for his views. In October, Kiraly stunned the chamber when he and other deputies requested a change in voting procedures on a controversial dam and power plant project opposed by many Hungarians as damaging to the environment. His request for a roll call vote sparked an acrimonious, spontaneous debate that was eventually settled by compromise. Taking government and party leaders at their word that this Soviet bloc country's Parliament should be more independent, Kiraly and other deputies have also called for new elections prior to those planned for 1990. The reformers say the current legislature _ with 75 percent Communist deputies _ is incapable of making independent decisions. In some ways, the changes in Parliament mirror events in the society at large. Within weeks this fall, Hungary went from debating whether a multi-party system was feasible to discussing how soon it would come about. The Communist leadership _ the country's ruling force _ has appealed for patience, saying the package of political reforms it outlined in November will take 18 to 24 months to introduce. Deputy Justice Minister Geza Kilenyi has said a new constitution and a law on establishing political parties will be adopted before the 1990 elections. Non-Communist candidates were allowed to contest and win seats in the last elections in 1985. But debates that seemed fiery and controversial then now seem dull. In December, for example, Budapest transport official Andras Derzsi won only a simple majority when elected to head a new ``superministry'' for construction, transport and communications. Just 25 deputies voted against Derzsi _ the only candidate put forward by Communist premier Miklos Nemeth. But 128 abstained in a vote that was forced into a recount after one deputy complained the 115 tally for absentions was inaccurate. On the dam project vote in October, Szueroes admitted the Communist leadership ``gave a firm orientation'' to party deputies not to support a referendum or the organization of international supervision. But he added swiftly in a December interview, ``This belongs to the past.'' 
Cleveland Yelder said he believes his latest marriage will last forever. But then, he felt the same way about the previous 16. ``I'm a very optimistic individual,'' said Yelder, who is nearly two weeks into his latest marriage. His shortest marriage lasted two weeks, his longest about five years. ``Some people say once you're married, that's it _ you go through thick and thin,'' said Yelder, 46, sitting on his sofa and stroking a long-haired cat. ``I like this cat, but if this cat scratches me, I'll put it down.'' Yelder's 48-year-old wife, Ethel, was unconcerned about his previous marriages. ``I never heard of a man being married that many times,'' said Mrs. Yelder, who married Yelder nearly two weeks ago. ``But it didn't bother me a bit.'' According to the Guinness Book of World Records, the highest number of verified marriages in the monogamous world is 27. The Yelders live in a small, green house. Mrs. Yelder works as a part-time nurse's assistant. Yelder, who has been unemployed since heart surgery nearly 19 years ago, does the cooking. ``My wife is the breadwinner,'' he said Sunday night. ``I cook and clean up. I'm the house man.'' Yelder said he has no regrets about his previous marriages. He said his divorces can show people that ``there's a way out of marriage without violence. In all those marriages I've never killed any one; I've never shot anyone.'' ``A divorce can be mended, a broken heart can be mended, but once you're 6 feet under, it's all over,'' he said. ``That's my philosophy.'' Probate courts list 16 of Yelder's marriages, starting at age 18 when he married a 15-year-old girl. He said he had only three children during his marriages, but has fathered 11 illegitimate children. As for his new wife, ``If she said tonight, `Baby it's over, pack your grip, make your trip,''' he would end the marriage, Yelder said. 
Like prizefighters entering the ring, Republican President Bush and the Democratic Congress will return to the political arena this month, after two months of preparation, with lots of smiles and a handshake. And as in any championship, high-stakes fight, it will be only a matter of time before someone ends up with a bloodied nose _ the tough, veteran Democrats who have controlled Congress for years, or the Republican administration, which showed in last fall's campaign that when the going got tough, it did, too. The Senate's new Democratic majority leader, George Mitchell of Maine, already has asked the president-elect to approach Congress with ``candor, consultation and trust.'' George Bush, who promised a ``kinder and gentler nation'' in his successful campaign, has indicated he wants a closer relationship with Congress than that enjoyed by his predecessor, Ronald Reagan. Round One won't begin until after Bush is inaugurated on the West Front of the Capitol on Jan. 20 and Congress returns the following Monday, Jan. 23. Then, however brief, will come that Washington institution, the political honeymoon. But unlike other Washington institutions, the honeymoon probably won't last long. Democrats, firmly in control of both the House and Senate, are anxiously awaiting the new president's budget recommendations, starting with his ideas on how to save $32 billion to meet deficit-reduction targets. Then, in May, Bush will have to ask Congress to raise the national debt ceiling above its current $2.8 trillion figure. Democrats also will have their own agenda to push, perhaps a renewed drive for a hike in the minimum wage, and other costly plans to compete for tight budget dollars. And all these problems and programs come wrapped in Bush's promise not to raise taxes. ``The deficit is a time bomb with a lighted fuse,'' Sen. J. Bennett Johnston, D-La., said in a recent interview. ``Bush's tendered solution, his flexible freeze, is deja voodoo all over again. The idea that we can grow our way out of this mess is absolute nonsense.'' The question is: How can a Republican president, elected by a solid majority, deal with a Democratic Senate and House, also elected by a solid majority? History, it seems, is against the president. ``Presidential success is mainly a function of the number of seats in Congress held by the president's party,'' say writers Norman J. Ornstein of the American Enterprise Institute, Thomas E. Mann of the Brookings Institution and Michael J. Malbin of the House Republican Conference, in their book, ``Vital Statistics on Congress.'' Using figures compiled by Congressional Quarterly, the congressional observers uncovered some stark statistics. ``When one party controls both branches, success never drops below 75 percent,'' they said. ``With divided government, presidents average well below that level of success.'' For example, when Lyndon Johnson swept into office in 1964, his agenda, measured by public positions, was near 88 percent successful in the Congress. Republican Gerald Ford, however, managed only a 58.2 percent ``victory'' rate in first full year in office. When Jimmy Carter marched into the White House in 1976 with his party in control of both houses of Congress, he enjoyed, initially, a 75 percent success rate in pushing his legislation. But that shouldn't be the case in 1989, with Bush vowing no new taxes and Democrats almost daring him to run the country without them. ``It isn't a question of economics, it's a question of mathematics,'' says House Speaker Jim Wright of Texas. ``I want to give him the benefit of the doubt. Surely he must have a plan,'' Wright says. Across the Capitol, Senate leader Mitchell also is offering to reason with Bush. ``The larger objective is to provide to our people the greatest possible individual liberty and economic opportunity,'' Mitchell said. ``Our system, divided or not, can do that. But it can do it only if there is a shared understanding of the need for candor, consultation and trust.'' ``Divided government cannot work in a polarized society, one in which mistrust and deceit are widespread,'' Mitchell added. 
EDITORS: Lee Gould covers the Congress for The Associated Press. 
Twenty-seven people were arrested during a demonstration to protest the Pilgrim nuclear plant's restart nearly three years after it was closed for management and maintenance problems. Those arrested, who were among more than 125 demonstrators, were charged with trespassing and released, authorities said. ``It was a symbolic show of our frustration, of our determination not to go away,'' said Donald Muirhead, a member of Citizens for Responsible Energy. The protesters gathered at Duxbury High School on Saturday morning and positioned themselves at the entrance to one of the plant's two main gates. One protester, Priscilla Dean Hatton of West Yarmouth, said she is a 12th-generation descendant of a Pilgrim born on the Mayflower. ``Why are they still making these wasteful products with no place to dump them?'' she asked during the hour-long protest. On Friday, the federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission cleared the way for low-power testing of the 670-megawatt reactor for up to 5 percent of its capacity. If the plant's restart schedule is followed, Pilgrim will provide customers power when it hits 10 percent of capacity sometime next month. It will reach full power in four months. Pilgrim had been shut since April 1986, when the NRC called the reactor ``one of the worst-run'' nuclear plants in the country. Boston Edison has spent about $200 million since the shutdown to replace nearly all of the plant's top management, fix mechanical problems and fight skepticism by the NRC and a growing anti-nuclear movement among residents. But the state has vowed to do everything possible to keep the plant from operating. State officials including Gov. Michael S. Dukakis have said evacuation plans for those living near the plant are inadequate despite utility company revisions. They also have said the plant should not reopen until a new study of leukemia rates of nearby residents is complete. 
Mayor Edward Koch says he doesn't intend to change his outspoken manner to win re-election. ``Lots of people have said to me, `Listen, Ed, shut up for the next six months and you'll get re-elected. Automatically.' ... ``I don't want to shut up,'' he said on WABC-TV's ``Eyewitness News Conference,'' broadcast Sunday. Koch, who has said he will run for an unprecedented fourth term this year, alienated many blacks during the Democratic presidential primary by saying Jews would be crazy to vote for Jesse Jackson. ``I do speak out occasionally too much,'' the mayor admitted. ``But I don't think so much too much. I believe that the people of this town want a mayor who's not afraid.'' He added: ``I have a right to maintain my principles and to speak out. And I'm not afraid to do that.'' 
Nicholas Calas, a poet and art critic whose work focused on young artists and new art movements, has died at age 81. Calas died of heart failure Saturday in his Manhattan home. Calas contributed to Art Forum, Arts Magazine, Art International and other journals. Many of his essays on the deeper cultural meanings of modern art were collected in ``Art in the Age of Risk.'' Calas collaborated with the anthropologist Margaret Mead on ``Primitive Heritage,'' a 1953 anthology of texts chosen for their literary and humanist significance. Born to Greek parents in Switzerland, Calas was educated in Greece, and lived in Paris during the 1930s, where he joined the Surrealist movement. His poems were written in Greek and translated into English for publication here. Calas came to the United States in 1940 and worked for the Office of War Information during World War II. He became a U.S. citizen in 1945. Calas is survived by his wife, the former Elena von Hoershelman. 
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said all nations must cooperate to track down whoever sabotaged Pan Am Flight 103 but made clear she opposes an ``eye for an eye'' revenge attack that could harm innocent people. In Washington, FBI Director William Sessions welcomed PLO chairman Yasser Arafat's reported offer to help in identifying any suspects. However, he said he still had no evidence linking a terrorist group to the plastic explosives bomb that downed the New York-bound Boeing 747. Mrs. Thatcher distanced herself Sunday from U.S. vows to punish the culprits, saying ``I don't think an eye for an eye and tooth for a tooth is ever valid.'' The Dec. 21 explosion and crash at Lockerbie, Scotland killed all 259 people on board. Another 11 people on the ground are missing and presumed dead. ``The most important thing to do is to try to get the cooperation of all nations to track these people down so that they are brought to justice,'' Mrs. Thatcher said in a television interview with journalist David Frost. ``Revenge is never a good word to use because it can affect innocent people,'' she added. The Sunday Express, a London newspaper, reported without attribution that Arafat has vowed to dispatch an assassination squad to hunt down and kill whoever is responsible. The paper said the Palestine Liberation Organization also sent a message to President Reagan pledging ``a traitor's death'' for the bomber if its operatives find him first. U.S. officials say no group has offered a credible claim of responsibility for the attack. Speculation on suspects has focused mostly on Palestinian extremists opposed to Arafat's Middle East peace initiative. Reagan said in his weekly radio broadcast Saturday that a report overseen by President-elect Bush advocating possible military action against terrorists ``ought to be giving some people sleepless nights'' in the wake of the bombing. He did not elaborate. Bush vowed last week to ``seek hard and punish firmly, decisively, those who did this, if you could ever find them.'' Sessions, interviewed Sunday on ABC's ``This Week with David Brinkley'' and NBC's ``Meet the Press'' said Arafat has ``a wealth of information he can give us'' but said he opposes any attempt by the PLO leader to retaliate by killing any suspects. ``We believe in the system of justice,'' the FBI director said. ``We hope those people are handled in the courts.'' He added that contacts between the FBI and Arafat presumably could be set up by the State Department. U.S. and PLO officials opened a dialogue Dec. 17 after Arafat renounced terrorism and recognized Israel's right to exist. Sessions said he anticipated a lengthy investigation into the crash. Mrs. Thatcher allowed Reagan to use U.S. bombers based in Britain to bomb Libya on April 15, 1986, in retaliation for alleged Libyan sponsorship of international terrorism. At least 100 people were killed in the raid. She said Sunday that no country should grant the Pan Am bombers safe haven or permit them to escape justice. ``I think public opinion is disgusted with nations that will not try to track down terrorists, absolutely disgusted,'' she said. Searchers in Lockerbie gave up their traditional New Year's celebrations Sunday to continue the hunt for bodies and wreckage. Police said that one more body, thought to be one of the missing local residents, was recovered, bringing the total found to 242. British newspapers reported Saturday that investigators believe the bomb was smuggled onto the flight in Frankfurt, possibly by a Lebanese-born passenger duped into carrying it. The West German government said no evidence supports those reports. Flight 103 originated in Frankfurt with a Boeing 727 and switched to a Boeing 747 at London's Heathrow Airport for the trip to New York. 
A Palestinian held by Greece and wanted by the United States for the 1982 bombing of a Pan Am jetliner may hold clues to the group that blew up Flight 103 over Scotland last month. Whether he will ever tell his story in a U.S. court is an open question. Greece's Supreme Court has twice delayed the extradition of Mohammed Rashid, 39, who is thought by Western intelligence experts to specialize in the planting of bombs aboard jetliners and to be a senior operative in the May 15 Palestinian terrorist group. The Rashid case has taken on extra significance since the Dec. 21 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, which killed all 259 people aboard the Boeing 747 and about a dozen on the ground. U.S. and European officials are focusing on the May 15 group and another extremist group, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command, as possible suspects in the bombing. On Nov. 15, the Greek Supreme Court indefinitely postponed its decision on extraditing Rashid, saying the United States had failed to supply key documents in the case. The U.S. Embassy in Athens says the requested documents have been turned over to the Greek government. ``The requested papers have been sent. I guess they are being moved from ministry to ministry,'' said an embassy representative, speaking on condition of anonymity. Rashid is wanted in the United States on charges of planting a bomb that exploded on a Pan Am jet as it flew from Tokyo to Hawaii six years ago. A Japanese teenager was killed and 15 people were hurt. Rashid was arrested at Athens airport on May 29 on a tip from U.S. officials and was sentenced to seven months in jail for entering Greece with a false passport. American officials have claimed Rashid and the May 15 organization _ which is named for the date the 1948 Arab-Israeli War began _ also involved in the 1986 bombing of a TWA jetliner over southern Greece that killed four Americans. That blast is not mentioned in the extradition request. The Supreme Court has not said when it will issue its decision. An extradition ruling has to be approved by Justice Minister Vassilis Rotis before it can be carried out. The long delays in Rashid's case, combined with the rejection of an Italian plea for extradition of another Palestinian, have given rise to charges that Greece's governing Panhellenic Socialist Movement is not committed to combating international terrorism. In early December, the government reneged on an extradition agreement with Italy and put 27-year-old Abdel Osama Zomar on a plane to Benghazi, Libya. Zomar was suspected of helping to organize a September 1982 attack on Rome's main synagogue that killed a 2-year-old boy and left 37 people injured. The Palestinian had been imprisoned in Greece since November 1982, when he was arrested at the Greek-Turkish border driving a car loaded with explosives. Justice Minister Rotis said he overturned a 1984 Supreme Court extradition decision because Zomar was ``acting in the struggle for the re-acquisition of his homeland.'' Zomar had been identified as one of two Arabs jailed in Greece with links to the extremist Palestinian faction Fatah-Revolutionary Council, which is headed by terrorist mastermind Abu Nidal. The other is Omar Mabrouki, serving a 10-year jail term for trying to shoot the Jordanian charge d'affairs in Athens in 1984. According to Greek and Western intelligence officials, Zomar's detention may have triggered an attack on the City of Poros cruise ship last July near Athens. Nine people were killed and 11 others were injured in the assault. There have been no arrests in connection with the ship attack, but one of the four men apparently involved in the machine-gun and grenade assault has been identified by Greek police as Mohammed Khadar, 40, the alleged operations officer for the Abu Nidal group. In the past, Greece has been criticized by its Western allies for failing to crack down on suspected Palestinian terrorists operating out of the country. Last year, the government was accused of allowing the Abu Nidal group to operate a logistics office in Athens in return for a promise by the group that it would not launch attacks in Greece. The office was shut down in July 1987 after strong protests from Greece's allies. Greece has repeatedly denied it is soft on terrorism. ``The government condemns all forms of terrorism and takes all measures it deems necessary to fight it,'' government spokesman Sotiris Kostopoulos said recently . 
EDITORS: Banks, government offices, markets and many businesses are closed in Japan Monday for the new year holiday. 
The AP 
The New Year rumbled into Peru with an earthquake, left thousands homeless in Philippine fireworks accidents and claimed at least 51 lives in Brazil when a tour ship capsized. But 1989 brought a warm exchange of greetings from President Reagan and Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev. It ushered in a prayer for peace by the Roman Catholic leader in war-torn El Salvador and a tentative olive branch from one Korea to the other. In Afghanistan, the guns again roared, despite a New Year's cease-fire resolution by the Soviet-backed regime. Rocket and artillery barrages ended a brief truce between rival Shiite Moslem militias in Lebanon. Traditions persisted. Thousands blew noisemakers in Times Square in New York to watch 1989 begin, and millions of Japanese went more sedately to temples and shrines to pray for health and prosperity as the year of the snake slithered in. In Italy, a preservation group found Sunday that the tower of Pisa leaned a little more during 1988, tilting another .0508 inches toward the ground. At that rate, it will take at least a century to topple. In Havana, President Fidel Castro pledged ``socialism or death'' in a televised speech marking the 30th anniversary of his communist revolution. Revelers on a jammed cruise ship in Rio de Janeiro listened to samba music as they sailed for a fireworks display off Copacabana Beach. The boat capsized, and authorities said at least 51 people drowned. Survivors said few life jackets were accessible when the 100-foot Bateau Mouche went down. Illegal fireworks ignited six fires in Manila on Sunday, leaving thousands of people homeless, authorities said. Hospital officials said seven people died from shootings and stabbings in New Year's celebrations and brawls in Manila and Cebu. A check with doctors at 20 Manila hospitals showed 1,134 people were injured, mostly by fireworks. President Corazon Aquino today called for an end to the widely ignored ban on fireworks and ``some kind of regulation and control to minimize'' accidents. Fire killed at least one person and destroyed 3,000 makeshift houses in one slum neighborhood. At least 733 revelers in Italy were reported injured by fireworks, none seriously. At least two deaths and dozens of injuries were attributed to fireworks accidents in West Germany. An earthquake registering 5.5 on the Richter scale shook Peru, but officials had no report of injuries. It came after the lights went out in Lima for the second New Year's in a row in a power blackout believed caused by leftist guerrillas. Children injured by the Dec. 7 earthquake in Armenia received toys and clothes from around the world, Tass said. The Soviet news agency said a boy from Spitak was asked what he wanted from Father Frost, a bearded man who brings gifts on New Year's. ``Let him return my mother,'' 8-year-old Armen Kazaryan said from his hospital bed. The new year elicited olive branches from leaders worldwide. North Korean President Kim Il Sung, in a New Year's speech, invited South Korean President Roh Tae-woo to a political conference in the near future. Reagan and Gorbachev each sent New Year's messages to each other's country. On Soviet television, Reagan said: ``Despite our disagreements, we have been able to find some common ground.'' In El Salvador, Archbishop Arturo Rivera Damas said urged an end to a 10-year-old civil war in which he said 1,369 people died in 1988. ``This situation is a heart-breaking cry that summons us to keep striving for peace with the weapons the gospel has put in our hands: the weapons of light, of hope, of reconciliation, all the fruits of love,'' he said. Pope John Paul II told 20,000 worshipers at New Year's Mass in the Vatican's St. Peter's Basilica that nations should give special attention to minorities and urged kidnappers to release their hostages. ``Let's hope that it is the year of peace, of justice, of growing solidarity, of social solicitude for each one and for everybody,'' he said. In Afghanistan, the government had promised a New Year's Day cease-fire. But guerrillas attacked government troops in two villages Sunday in an eastern province and eight guerrillas were killed, official Radio Kabul said. A bomb blast at a temple in India killed at least five Hindus as they prayed on Sunday, 1989's first victims of continuing Sikh militant violence in India's northwestern Punjab state. In Chile, officials said 11 teen-age inmates at a juvenile detention center died in a fire that apparently started during a jailbreak _ five minutes before the new year. 
President Fidel Castro, celebrating the 30th anniversary of his revolution, rejected market-oriented economic reforms and said that for Cuba, it is ``socialism or death.'' Castro's remarks, in a televised speech Sunday night, seemed aimed at the Soviet Union and other Communist countries that have been abandoning strict adherence to Marxist doctrine. ``Today we say with more force than ever, socialism or death, Marxism -Leninism or death,'' he said. Castro spoke to a large gathering from the balcony of the municipal building in the eastern city of Santiago, where he had proclaimed victory for his revolutionary struggle on Jan. 1, 1959. He did not refer directly to the Soviet Union in his remarks, saying only that the contemporary situation has been marked by ``confusion.'' In other speeches, Castro has been more explicit about his rejection of the reform policies of Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev. He has said that Cuba will never embrace any reforms that ``reek of capitalism.'' He also has acknowledged that the changes under Gorbachev could cause ``difficulties'' for Cuba. The Cuban-Soviet friendship, although far from breaking up, seems more tenuous now than it has been in decades. A key question is whether Soviet unhappiness with the way Cuba has used economic aid from the Kremlin _ estimated at $5 billion annually _ will lead to cutbacks. Castro has used the economic aid to help build his country's schools and hospitals, the Soviets say, and has neglected industrial development. Calling the revolution a ``beacon of light before the eyes of the world'' Castro said Cuba has an enormous responsibility to Third World countries to stick to its present hard-line Marxist-Leninist course. Much of Castro's speech was devoted to reviewing the revolutionary heritage of the people of Santiago and other cities in eastern Cuba. Cuba officials said Castro is expected to deliver a policy address on Wednesday. Despite Sunday's call for ideological steadfastness, Cuban policy has undergone some drastic changes in the past year, including its recent commitment to withdraw its 50,000 troops from Angola by 1991. In Latin America, Castro has been aggressively pursuing interests common to other countries in the area. The evolution of democracy in Latin America, which has been welcomed by the Reagan administration, has also had the ironic side effect of opening diplomatic opportunities for Castro. The Cuban leader, once known for his efforts to promote violent revolution, now seems more interested in pursuing normal ties with elected governments. Castro attended presidential inagurations in Ecuador and Mexico in recent months and may participate in the inauguration of the President Carlos Andres Perez of Venezuela next month. During Castro's visit to Mexico in late November, his first since he was exiled there in the 1950s, he said he envisions the eventual unity of Cuba and the rest of Latin America. ``One day, we will make one big giant,'' he said. 
The judge who presided over PTL's bankruptcy proceedings said he received threats during the case, and couldn't understand why Jim Bakker's followers ``were interested in that little, sawed-off runt.'' Rufus Reynolds, who retired Saturday at age 81 as a U.S. bankruptcy judge, was guarded by U.S. marshals during the bankruptcy proceedings as the FBI investigated the threats. ``They didn't say, `I'm going to kill you.' They said, `The Lord's going to take you,''' Reynolds said. ``I didn't know Christians could be so critical. They would just chew me out.'' When a woman called the bankruptcy court in Columbia, S.C., to find out if he was a Christian, ``I said, `You tell her I was when I started this case, but now I plead the Fifth Amendment.''' Reynolds said television ministries are ``wide open'' for mismanagement or corruption. ``I think Congress should pass a very strong act forcing the IRS ... to make them comply with an accounting,'' Reynolds said. ``We have all kinds of laws protecting consumers. Religion is just another consumer item, just the same as selling soap or washing powders or aspirin.'' Reynolds also said he was amazed at the response to the travails that brought down Bakker's evangelistic empire. ``What puzzled me was why people were interested in that little, sawed-off runt,'' Reynolds said. Bakker, who resigned from PTL in 1987, responded Sunday, saying: ``I am shocked to find Judge Reynolds so prejudiced toward us, and to hear of him making fun of us and the PTL partners. ... ``He should not have tried the PTL case with these feelings against us.'' The ministry filed for protection under federal bankruptcy laws in June 1987, three months after Bakker resigned from PTL. Two months ago, Reynolds ordered Bakker, his wife, Tammy, and former aide David Taggart to repay PTL nearly $7.7 million in benefits he found to be excessive. Last month, he approved the sale of PTL assets to a Canadian businessman. Also last month, a federal grand jury indicted Bakker and former top aide Richard Dortch on charges including fraud and conspiracy, accusing them of diverting more than $4 million in PTL money for their own benefit. Two other former PTL officials were indicted. Upon his retirement, Reynolds sand he left the PTL case discouraged and somewhat cynical. From the beginning, Reynolds said he believed the only way to save PTL was to keep it intact as a religious operation. ``It's a one-purpose center, a religious center _ a wonderful idea,'' Reynolds said. ``If Bakker had employed reasonable business principles, just on an average, they wouldn't owe a dime.'' Reynolds said he was disappointed at the outcome of the case. ``When you've had 40,000 cases _ at least; when you've had success in lots of them, the majority of them; when you take the one most publicized, best known, and you make a failure, you can't feel very good. It's that simple,'' Reynolds said. ``I'm going to take a bath and forget about it,'' Reynolds said. ``Someone asked me what was the best part of the whole case. I said, `Getting out.''' 
``I don't think an eye for an eye and tooth for a tooth is ever valid.'' _ British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, distancing herself from U.S. vows to punish those responsible for the explosion of Pan Am Flight 103 over Scotland. 
``We still don't know the magnitude of the S&amp;L crisis. We're not even certain what the regulators have been doing the past week, running up a tab of some $40 billion.'' _ Senate Republican Leader Bob Dole of Kansas, on the rescue by federal regulators of 217 savings institutions in 1988. 
``We made it because we were strong and could swim. If you weren't in good shape, you simply died.'' _ Passenger Hans Nihaj of Denmark who swam to safety with his wife, daughter and five countrymen after an overcrowded boat capsized New Year's Eve off Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 
A couple was found dead in the master bedroom of their home in this affluent village's first homicide in nearly a decade, police said. Shanta Chervu, 51, and her husband, Lakshmamrao, 58, both doctors, were stabbed and possibly bludgeoned, said Police Chief William Keresey. A relative called police Sunday evening after finding that the rear door of the home had been broken into, Keresey said. No motive for the slayings was determined, police said. Chervu was a professor at Albert Einstein College of Medicine; his wife was a doctor at New Rochelle Hospital, police said. It was the first homicide in this New York City suburb of 6,000 residents since about 1979, when a police officer shot and killed a robber who was holding up a drug store, Keresey said. 
Residents of two states today cleaned up homes damaged by a 12-foot wall of water that surged down the Virgin River after an dike broke, forcing 1,500 people to evacuate and closing Interstate 15. The 2,000-foot earthen dike 15 miles east of here gave way early Sunday, flooding 50 to 60 homes and 100 apartment units in southwest Utah and three homes in Littlefield, Ariz., authorities said. No injuries were reported. The dam, which was less than 4 years old, had a history of seepage, authorities said. When civil defense sirens signaled the evacuation shortly after midnight Saturday, some of the 1,500 people in the flood's path mistakenly thought they heralded the new year, officials said. Sherri Hansen of Bloomington and her husband had 20 minutes to evacuate before the water hit. They sat on a hill watching through binoculars. ``We sat there hoping and praying the river wouldn't get us,'' she said. ``The river didn't hit everyone. I don't know how it chose us, but we really got nailed.'' The water surged into the Hansens' home, filling the basement to the ceiling and doing structural damage estimated at $40,000. In Littlefield, Lester C. Taylor, 27, his wife and five children rescued many of their belongings before their adobe home was submerged in 5 feet of water. ``The bad part was making sure my wife and the kids were OK,'' Taylor said. ``I was scared.'' Utah Gov. Norm Bangerter flew to the region 300 miles south of Salt Lake City, declared Washington County a disaster area in an attempt to gain state and federal aid. At a news conference, Bangerter said the dike, built for $23.5 million in 1983, would be rebuilt. He said engineers would try to determine the cause of the 300-foot-wide breach that opened. The dike had helped contain Quail Creek Reservoir. In all, 25,000 acre feet of water rushed through the breach and down the Virgin River, but the surge was short-lived. By midday, it had slowed to a trickle and power had been restored. Interstate 15, closed for 14 hours, was reopened after several bridges spanning the river were declared safe. Two bridges in the St. George area were washed out, closing part of Utah 9. Seepage at the dike dated to 1985, the year the reservoir was filled, said Ronald Thompson, chairman of the Washington County Water Conservancy District. Even before construction, state geologists had warned that the presence of gypsum salt in the bedrock beneath the dike could cause problems. Gypsum dissolves if exposed to water for prolonged periods. Previous leaks were repaired with little difficulty, Thompson said. New seepage was discovered Saturday morning, and by evening what had been small water loss had expanded to a major leak, said Thompson. Heavy equipment was dispatched to reinforce the dike, but by 10:30 p.m. it became apparent nothing could be done to prevent a breach and the machinery was pulled out. 
A 15-year-old who got lost in the Cleveland National Forest survived six days and bitter-cold nights by sleeping in hollow logs and eating snow and spiders, his mother said. ``I don't know how he did it, being out there in 20 degrees and below,'' Debbie Campbell said of her son, Andrew. ``He kept telling himself he had more to do in life. He's a strong boy, and he's got a will to live.'' The boy was in fair condition early today at Sharp Memorial Hospital, where he was being treated for minor frostbite and hunger, hospital spokeswoman Pauline Renner said. ``His feet are swollen ... and very bruised,'' said Mrs. Campbell of rural Guatay. ``He's lost about 20 pounds.'' A father and son who had gone for a drive in the eastern San Diego County backcountry found the missing teen-ager Friday, three days after authorities abandoned their search despite protests by his parents. Though the boy was wearing several pairs of socks, thermal underwear, a flannel shirt and Army field jacket, nighttime temperatures dipped into the 20s for several days while he was missing. ``It's just a miracle that he was found alive out there as low as the temperatures dropped,'' Mrs. Campbell said. The youth had become separated from a friend while returning home Dec. 23 from an overnight fishing trip with a group of boys. He had frostbitten feet and toes when he arrived at the hospital by ambulance, Renner said. Mrs. Campbell said her son couldn't remember some things that happened or the order in which events occurred. But he could recall crawling, walking and jogging through the forest, eating snow and spiders, sleeping in a hollow log and burying himself under a mound of dirt to stay warm, she said. ``I asked him, `How can you eat spiders?' and he said, `I plucked off the legs and ate them,''' Mrs. Campbell said. The boy was rescued by Bill Orsborn, 60, a retired firefighter from La Mesa, and his son, Mark, 29. ``He was just off under some oak trees wandering around,'' Bill Orsborn said. ``He was disoriented. He didn't know where he was, how long he was out there or what day it was.'' While driving him back to Guatay, about 60 miles east of downtown San Diego, Campbell recalled how he ate handfuls of snow because water in the ravines was foul, the elder Orsborn said. ``He mentioned that he had tried to eat some crawdads from a stream, but that they made him sick,'' Orsborn said. Authorities had abandoned their search Tuesday after dogs trailing his scent lost it near a roadside. Sheriff's officials said they believed Campbell, who ran away from home once before, hitched a ride out of the forest and was safe. ``I do feel angry that they just quit,'' Mrs. Campbell said. ``We didn't give up, though. We had a search party ready to go.'' A taped statement issued by the sheriff's department said officials will review how the search for Campbell was conducted. 
The Pentagon will present the Bush administration with a proposal to test a giant laser weapon modified so that it can destroy enemy satellites, according to a published report. The proposal could spark controversy, because some members of Congress and others oppose the development of anti-satellite technology on the grounds that it could escalate the arms race. The laser, named Miracl, was designed to shoot down enemy missiles and has been tested successfully at the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. But now the Air Force is preparing to engage in anti-satellite tests, which could occur as early as this year, The New York Times reported Sunday. A duty officer at the Pentagon said Sunday there would be no immediate comment on the report. To conduct the tests, the device must be modified so its beams are steady enough to be focused on objects hundreds of miles away. Experts say the modification will be relatively easy, but the laser will have to be tested before anyone knows whether it can actually destroy satellites. It will be tested on old U.S. satellites, the paper said. The decision to upgrade the laser was made early last month by Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci, and was reported in the Dec. 19 issue of Aviation Week and Space Technology. However, the military must receive White House approval before the device is tested on satellites. President-elect Bush has given no indication of his position on the issue. Gen. John Piotrowski, commander in chief of the United States Space Command, has said that the Soviet Union has lasers capable of destroying American satellites and that the United States' lack of such equipment is a ``grave detriment to our national security.'' Paul Stares, a research associate at the Brookings Institution, countered that the planned laser could ``undermine the general improvement in U.S. and Soviet relations, as well as progress in arms control.'' 
A man who held police at bay for two hours and threatened to shoot his children apparently did so because he was upset the Cincinnati Bengals beat the Seattle Seahawks in a playoff game, authorities said. The standoff began about 12:30 a.m. Sunday, when the children's mother called to report her husband had barricaded himself with a gun inside the family's suburban Cincinnati condominium, Union Township police dispatcher John Kiskaden said. Officers arrived to find Doran Whitney, 30, formerly of Seattle, threatening to shoot the children, ages 2 years and 3 months, Kiskaden said. The dispatcher said he didn't know the children's sexes. The children later were found unharmed and asleep in their beds. Police said Whitney surrendered peacefully about 2:30 a.m. and was charged with aggravated burglary, aggravated menacing, domestic violence, inducing panic and child endangering. He was being held Sunday in the Union Township jail, Kiskaden said. Whitney became despondent after watching Saturday's National Football League game in which Cincinnati defeated Seattle, 21-13, police said. ``We get them every year,'' Kiskaden said. ``Last year, we had a guy drive his car into a tree because the Bengals lost.'' 
g 
A family of nine squeezes into an apartment the size of a small studio. Dozens of farmworkers share a single house. Others live in their cars or, worse, in bushes. Housing conditions in 1988 for farmworkers in the Salinas and Pajaro valleys about 120 miles south of San Francisco were the worst in decades, according to Monterey County officials. ``I would say this is probably the worst I've seen in farmworker housing in Monterey County from the standpoint of ignoring the health and welfare of the farmworker,'' said Walter Wong, Monterey County director of environmental health. ``They're putting them in such extreme conditions _ such as sleeping on top of pesticide sacks, sleeping in caves, sleeping in the bushes, cooking in dirt in the ground, with no water, no toilets,'' he said. Wong's agency is charged with licensing farm labor camps and enforcing health codes. In 1988, he set a record by shutting down five illegal camps, yet he concedes that for every camp he raided, many others went unreported. ``The fact is, there's just going to be more of these extreme substandard housing conditions unless there is more housing developed for the farmworker,'' he said, adding that landlords and labor contractors are scooping up 100 percent profits under current conditions. Conditions are as primitive as any the ``harvest gypsies'' of the Depression era endured, Wong said. Inspectors found workers and their families living in garages that were divided only with fabric partitions. Workers at one camp used a discarded bathtub for bathing, building a fire beneath it to warm the water. Monterey County Supervisor Sam Karas toured some of the camps last summer and discovered workers living in outhouses. ``It's really a disgrace,'' said Crescencio Padilla, a former farmworker and longtime community activist. ``I saw the same situation 20 years ago, and it's worse than it was then. We're going backward.'' Just over a decade ago, the Salinas Valley enjoyed a reputation for good working and living conditions following a successful organizing drive by the United Farm Workers union. Many growers provided camps for workers. But conditions have changed since then, and observers cite several pressures that have combined to create the farmworker housing crisis: _ The federal amnesty program for illegal aliens attracted a larger stream of workers and family members to an area where housing costs are twice the national average. At least two workers competed for every job last summer. Rents can quickly eat up a worker's monthly earnings. A two-bedroom house in Salinas rents for about $800 a month, while the minimum wage for farmworkers is $5 an hour and most workers take home only about $200 to $250 a week. _ More families are choosing to live here year-round, filing for unemployment benefits and hoping to find piecework during the off-season. _ The number of licensed labor camps in the county has fallen from more than 200 during the 1970s to 48 as growers and the government have gotten out of the housing business. _ Growers are relying more on independent contractors for their labor supply. The number of contractors in the county has more than tripled in the last three years, according to some estimates, and workers are told a labor contractor's responsibility is to find jobs, not housing. 
Police searched today for the men who shot a 62-year-old mother of 14 to death ``like an animal'' through the front door of her home. Doris Smith was shot early Sunday in the borough of Brooklyn after she refused to let three or four men involved in a dispute with a member of her family into her home, police and family members said. ``Before she could turn around they cut loose,'' said her eldest son, Steven, 38. ``She was gunned down like an animal. Everyone panicked and started hollering, and the guys ran away.'' Mrs. Smith was shot six times, and police recovered about 14 spent 9mm bullet casings, said Detective Sgt. Harold V. Paulson. No one else was hit. Smith said four men had come looking for one of his brothers, who had warned his mother not to tell anyone he was home. Smith said a girlfriend was involved. The shooting was the result of a dispute between the gunmen and a member of Mrs. Smith's family, but was not drug-related, said Detective Sgt. Vincent Gerecitano. Paulson said that, as far as police knew, Mrs. Smith was ``an innocent victim.'' Mrs. Smith was a retired housekeeper who was widowed six years ago. Smith said the family had expected to gather on New Year's Day for an annual dinner of his mother's specialities _ roast chicken and apple pie. ``She was a good mother,'' he said. ``She didn't drink or smoke or even go out. She was glad that she lived another year. Now, we have to make funeral arrangements ... It's not easy to start the new year like this.'' 
An official Armenian newspaper has printed a letter purported to be from Armenian nationalists who threaten to wage terrorist attacks with U.S.-made Stinger missiles if their leaders are not freed from jail. Rafael Popoyan, an Armenian activist, called the letter a ``total fabrication from beginning to end.'' He said it was another attempt by Soviet officials to discredit people agitating for annexation of Nagorno-Karabakh, a predominantly Armenian enclave of neighboring Azerbaijan. Published by the local Communist Party daily Kommunist, the letter demands the immediate release of members of the Karabakh Committee, a banned group that has led an 11-month campaign for the annexation of the enclave. If the committee's leaders are not freed, the unsigned document says, ``we will have recourse to mass terror ... in our arsenals, we have `Stingers,' provided by our friends.'' A facsimile copy of the purported document was published in Kommunist's Wednesday editions, which reached Moscow over the weekend. Kommunist said the letter was received by law enforcement officials, and labeled ``to be transmitted to the KGB.'' The letter made no additional reference to the Stingers. Many of the U.S.-made ground-to-air missiles have been shipped by the United States to insurgents fighting the Soviets in Afghanistan. Popoyan said the letter may herald a further crackdown by Soviet authorities on the Karabakh Committee, seven of whose members are now in jail. The other four reportedly are in hiding to avoid arrest. ``Now that so many members of the committee have been arrested, there is no one to answer these ridiculous charges,'' Popoyan said, speaking by telephone from Yerevan, the Armenian capital. ``The press is now closed to anyone from the committee.'' Soviet authorities jailed Karabakh committee leaders after the Dec. 7 earthquake in northwest Armenia, which killed 25,000 people. Authorities have accused committee members of sabotaging the earthquake relief effort and whipping up ethnic tensions by continuing to seek Karabakh's annexation by Armenia, a demand the Kremlin has refused. Since February, at least 60 people have been killed in ethnic rioting in mainly Christian Armenian and mainly Moslem Azerbaijan. 
In an apparent effort to help remedy severe consumer shortages, the Soviet Union announced it would ban the export of goods ranging from caviar to children's shoes. The official news agency Tass also said foreign visitors will be limited to 100 rubles worth of souvenirs. That is $166 at the official rate or $20-$25 at the black market rate. In the report Sunday, Tass said the restrictions specifically applied to tourists. The radical changes in export and customs regulations take effect Feb. 1 and last until the end of 1990. Tass said the Council of Ministers approved the changes, but did not give a date for the decision. It also did not explain the effect of the ruling on the Soviet Union's attempts to earn scarce hard currency by selling the best caviar, fur hats and coats, vodka and souvenirs in stores that require dollars, pounds or other freely convertible money. Tass said it will be forbidden to export televisions, refrigerators, freezers, washing and sewing machines, children's clothing and shoes, coffee and caviar. Coffee is not grown in the Soviet Union, and the import duty is up to $15 a pound. The announcement also said customs duties will climb to 20 to 100 percent of the retail price on vacuum cleaners, mixers, coffee-grinders, irons, radios, cameras, automobile parts and other items. It was not clear if this meant import or export duties. Export limits were imposed recently in Czechoslovakia after complaints that tourists from neighboring Soviet bloc nations were stripping its stores bare of consumer goods. The practice prompted a Soviet economist, Marina Pavlova-Silvanskaya, to warn in Soviet Culture on Sunday of an impending ``trade war'' among socialist countries. Many Russians travel to Eastern Europe on shopping trips, and Ms. Pavlova-Silvanskaya herself reminisced about trips to East Germany and Poland. She said her boss insisted that ``the program had to include a visit to some institution named for Lenin, lest the Germans or Poles think the citizens of the nation of the Great October Revolution are coming to shop.'' None of the socialist countries of Eastern Europe has fully convertible currencies, and they trade with each other based on exchange rates that often do not cover the exporting country's cost of production, much less a profit. Ms. Pavlova-Silvanskaya noted that capitalist countries don't find an invasion of shoppers a problem. On Nov. 7, a holiday in Hungary, 100,000 Hungarians went to Austria and spent $42 million in hard currency, she wrote. Rather than limit exports, the Austrians responded to the horde of shoppers with advertisements in Hungarian newspapers, inviting them back on their next day off, Ms. Pavlova-Silvanskaya noted. 
Fog blanketed the nation's midsection today, and freezing rain and low visibility made travel treacherous in some areas. Dense fog on New Year's Day caused delays for thousands of holiday travelers whose flights were canceled or stalled at airports in Kansas City, Mo., and St. Louis. ``It has been rather hectic,'' said George Small, manager of passenger services for Braniff at Kansas City International Airport. ``We couldn't land because of the fog and had to divert nine Kansas City-bound planes to Omaha (Neb.), several to Wichita (Kan.) and Tulsa (Okla.) and one to Amarillo, Texas.'' Fog was widespread today over the Ohio, middle Mississippi and lower Missouri river valleys. Dense fog advisories were in effect in Indiana and Kentucky. Fog also formed in Texas and Florida. Freezing drizzle was reported in Michigan, New York state and Pennsylvania. In the West, dense fog formed in the Idaho and Utah. A cold front from Michigan to Oklahoma was expected to move eastward and spread drier air across the Midwest, dissipating some of the fog. Behind the cold front, cold arctic air spread across the northern Plains into the upper Mississippi Valley. Temperatures dropped to around 20 below zero in parts of North Dakota and Minnesota. Precipitation was sparse, with some light rain and drizzle in the Pacific Northwest and snow in northern Idaho. Light snow also fell over the upper Mississippi Valley and northern Great Lakes. Winds gusted to 60 mph at Big Timber, Mont., and Cody, Wyo., and to 55 mph at Cut Bank, Mont. Today's forecast called for snow in much of New York state and northern New England, a mixture of rain and snow over southern New England, snow showers in Michigan, rain showers over much of Arkansas, rain in western Washington state and Oregon, and snow from the eastern sections of Washington and Oregon to northwest Montana. High temperatures were forecast in the single digits and teens in the northern and eastern sections of the northern Plains, the upper Mississippi Valley, northern portions of the upper Great Lakes and northern Maine; 20s and 30s in the northern and central Rockies, the remainder of the northern Plains, the central Plains, the middle Mississippi Valley, the remainder of the Great Lakes and northern parts of the Ohio Valley to the remainder of New England; 60s in Southern California and southern Arizona; 60s and 70s in Texas, the lower Mississippi Valley, the Gulf Coast states, much of Florida and the southern Atlantic Coast states; 80s in the southern Florida Peninsula; and the 40s and 50s in the rest of the nation. Temperatures around the nation at 2 a.m. EST ranged from 22 degrees below zero at Warroad, Minn., to 73 degrees at Key West, Fla. Other reports: _East: Atlanta 40 foggy; Boston 34 cloudy; Buffalo 35 cloudy; Charleston, S.C. 49 cloudy; Cincinnati 32 foggy; Cleveland 29 fair; Detroit 27 foggy; Miami 67 fair; New York 37 cloudy; Philadelphia 36 cloudy; Pittsburgh 33 cloudy; Portland, Maine 23 cloudy; Washington 36 foggy. _Central: Bismarck -21 fair; Chicago 26 foggy; Dallas-Fort Worth 56 cloudy; Denver 24 fair; Des Moines 13 fair; Indianapolis 25 foggy; Kansas City 25 cloudy; Minneapoli-St. Paul 1 fair; Nashville 41 foggy; New Orleans 59 cloudy; St. Louis 34 foggy. _West: Albuquerque 31 fair; Anchorage 28 fair; Las Vegas 34 fair; Los Angeles 51 fair; Phoenix 43 fair; Salt Lake City 21 foggy; San Diego 51 partly cloudy; San Francisco 40 fair; Seattle 40 cloudy. _Canada: Montreal 9 snow; Toronto 28 foggy. 
A man was shot to death, two others were wounded and at least 52 people were arrested as an estimated 600,000 revelers left Times Square to begin another new year, police said. Crowds began assembling for the Times Square celebration at 6 p.m. Saturday. Police began blocking off streets around about 8:40 p.m.; by 10:30 p.m. people were packed in shoulder-to-shoulder. The revelers counted down the last few seconds before midnight and watched a lighted ball slide down a pole, just as it has most New Year's Eves since 1907. When 1989 arrived, the crowd let loose, uncorking champagne, throwing confetti and even pitching a few bottles. ``Last year was a bad year but next year, I mean this year, is going to be cool,'' Paul Stahura, 26, of Lafayette, Ind., said just minutes into the new year. Three men, who were with three friends, were shot early Sunday after arguing with two men who apparently followed them from Times Square, said police Sgt. Raymond O'Donnell. Andrew Tringle, 19, was struck in the heart and died at Bellevue Hospital, O'Donnel said. Christoper Betta, 18, was hit three times in the leg and once in the neck, and Richard McCroy, 20, was wounded twice in the shoulder and once in the neck, said Officer Hugh Barry. Both were in satisfactory condition at Bellevue, said hospital administrator Don Middendorf. No one was arrested in the shootings. Of the 52 arrests in and around Times Square, 18 were for robbery, nine for grand larceny, one for criminal possession of a weapon, 12 for disorderly conduct, six for assault, four for reckless endangerment and two for menacing, O'Donnell said. Thirty-two Sanitation Department workers using eight mechanical brooms, 18 sweepers and three garbage trucks spent the first eight hours of the new year cleaning up the mess left by revelers, said Sanitation Department spokesman Jim Hart. Garbage from past New Year's Eve celebrations has averaged about 25 tons a year; this year's debris won't be tallied up until Tuesday, when the trucks are weighed, Hart said. 
An African student from Benin has been summarily sentenced to 15 days in prison following a bloody Christmas Eve brawl between Chinese and Africans in Nanking, an African diplomat said today. It was the first report that a second African had been formally arrested in connection with the brawl that left 11 Chinese and two Africans injured. The diplomat, Benin's first secretary, Gobo Bio Mamah, also quoted African students as saying that Chinese police stripped and tortured two students from Benin when they attacked 140 mostly African students at a guest house outside Nanking on Saturday. ``We have heard that they were made to walk almost naked in the cold as police poked them with electric cattle prods,'' Mamah said. ``They were doing this to make them talk. It appears to be torture.'' The brawl at Nanking's Hehai University sparked five days of anti-black protests and resulted in most of the city's African students being forced by police to the guest house on Dec. 26. The students had wanted to flee the east-central city for Beijing, but were stopped by police at Nanking's railway station. African students said about 400 Chinese police attacked them Saturday in the guest house and removed about half of them, returning some to their universities and sending others to another hotel. The student witnesses said Chinese police beat and detained seven or eight of their classmates. One witness said police charged the students as loudspeakers broadcast platitudes about China's great friendship with African nations. Another said he saw about seven police beating one student from the Congo. Chinese news reports said only that a student from Ghana, Alex Dzabaku Dosoo, had been arrested and three other students held for questioning. No mention was made of a student from Benin. But Mamah said officials from the Public Security Department in Beijing told him Sunday that student Ludovic Dossoumon had been sentenced without trial to 15 days in prison as ``punishment.'' Chinese authorities in Beijing refused to specify Dossoumon's alleged crimes, he said. ``They told me the authorities in Nanking were the only ones who could say anything,'' Mamah said. ``This action is unacceptable.'' Chinese authorities at the Ministry of Public Security said they were ``not clear'' about the arrests. At least 50 students from Hehai remained at the guest house today, apparently because they still wanted to go to Beijing. The rest apparently were at another hotel or at their universities. Jiangsu province said today that they also were ``not clear'' about the arrests and the exact whereabouts of the students, some of whom were from Western Europe, Japan and South Asia. A Ghanian diplomat said China had broken an agreement to keep the students at the guest house until a delegation representing nine African countries returned to Nanking. The delegation came to Nanking last Tuesday for negotiations, returned to Beijing and was planning to go again to Nanking later this week. ``We don't know why they broke the agreement,'' said the diplomat, Y.N. Ohene-Akrasi. ``But in light of the apparent police attack this is the least of our concerns.'' Chinese officials in Nanking have made it clear that no Chinese will be punished for the clash and subsequent demonstrations during which Chinese students destroyed property in African student dormitories and shouted, ``Down with black devils!'' In Hangzhou, capital of Zhejiang province, a standoff continued between 56 black Africans and Chinese at the Zhejiang Agricultural College. The students have locked themselves in their dormitory since Dec. 26 because they allege Chinese officials say they have the deadly disease AIDS. College officials have denied the claim. The weeklong incidents in Nanking and in Hangzhou are the latest in a series of incidents between Chinese and China's 1,500 African students, brought here to demonstrate China's solidarity with the Third World. Relations between Chinese and Africans are tense. Chinese are often openly racist and Africans are frustrated by a culture that is very different from their own. 
Police blamed overcrowding for the capsizing of a boat packed with revelers planning to watch a New Year's Eve fireworks display off Copacabana Beach. At least 51 people died, and divers searched for other victims today. Authorities today said they would seek homicide charges against those responsible for letting the jammed flat-bottomed craft _ built to hold 100 people _ go out. They said it ignored Port Authority orders not to sail in Saturday's choppy seas. Survivors said few life jackets were accessible when the 100-foot Bateau Mouche went down Saturday night in 65 feet of water about a mile from shore. One survivor, Plinco Donadio, said, ``I watched my wife die because I couldn't untie one of the life preservers to save her.'' As army divers searched the Atlantic Ocean and Guanabara Bay off Rio, confusion continued regarding how many people were on the double-decked sightseeing boat Bateau Mouche. Estimates have ranged from 130-150. The passenger list was on the sunken ship, said the company that booked the cruise. Officials gave no estimate of survivors. ``We think the majority of the bodies already have been taken out, but there always is the possibility of finding more,'' said Lt. Pedro Paulo Albuquerque of the Fire Department's Maritime Group. Irineu Barroso, a police precinct chief, said he hoped to seek an indictment for homicide. ``We are taking statements from survivors, and they are telling us that something aboard that boat was not right.'' Cid Castor, a director of Itatitaia Turismo, which booked the $220-per-person cruise, said his travel company had no responsibility for the operation of the outing. ``We are simply ticket sellers,'' said Castor, who said the passenger list was on the ship. The Sol e Mar restaurant, the boat's operator, referred calls to a local lawyer, but no one answered the number given. ``We don't know the exact cause of the sinking, but we think it was because of excess capacity,'' said Maj. Oldemiro Santos of the Fire Department's Maritime Group. The boat had a seven-piece samba band playing on board and tables set for dinner when it capsized. Passenger Fabricio Calo, who was rescued by a fishing boat, said: ``The boat was turning and shifting. Then tables started flying, glass started crashing, and the whole boat just turned over on its side.'' Luxury yachts and smaller boats heading to watch the midnight pyrotechnics display fished survivors from the stormy seas near the base of Sugar Loaf mountain. ``We rescued about 30 people from the sea,'' said Valentino Ribeiro, captain of one vessel, the Casablanca. ``There were people everywhere screaming for help. We took those we could and left the bodies. We couldn't take on any more.'' Officials said at least 51 people died. They had no reports of Americans on board. Brazil's largest private network, Globo TV, quoted maritime specialists saying the boat was not made to withstand Saturday night's choppy sea waters. But the Sol e Mar's spokesman, Gustavo Blanco, said Sunday that the boat was ``in perfect mechanical shape.'' According to Denmark's Hans Nihaj, who was on the boat with his wife, daughter and five fellow countrymen _ all of whom swam to safety _ there were no adequate life jackets or preservers on board. ``We made it because we were strong and could swim,'' Nihaj told The Associated Press. ``If you weren't in good shape, you simply died.'' Donadio, a photographer who lost his wife and two other relatives, said the life preservers were ``tied onto the railings in the lower part of the boat.'' The vessel was so crowded that a naval vessel ordered it to return to port, but it ignored the order, Barroso said. Survivors confirmed this account. The cruise boat's captain, Camilo da Costa, ``didn't want to go out,'' said his brother-in-law, Paulo Soares. ``He called us to say the boat was overloaded and the sea was too rough. But he had no choice. He would lose his job if he didn't sail.'' Da Costa died. 
A carload of gang members shouted at a 16-year-old youth, then sprayed him with bullets, in a holiday weekend of shootings that left two dead and capped a record year of gang violence. The death of Adam Lopez, 16, was among more than 330 attributed to gang violence in the county in 1988. In 1987, 284 died. At 9 p.m. Friday, about 15 minutes before Lopez was gunned down, 21-year-old Raymon Smith was killed in a drive-by attack in the same gang-dominated area of south-central Los Angeles. The attackers in the two shootings escaped without being identified, police said. In addition to gang-related shootings over the holiday weekend, New Year's revelers marked Saturday night with a barrage of gunfire into the air that left one dead and 8,700 homes without power, police said. 
The imperial family today canceled a traditional post-New Year's appearance for the first time in 21 years, citing Emperor Hirohito's grave condition. But the family kept the gates to the palace open, allowing at least 19,000 people to walk through and sign registries by early afternoon. The visitors included 90-year-old Kenji Muramatsu, who wore a traditional kimono and carried a tattered Japanese flag from World War II. ``I came to pray for the emperor,'' he said. ``I want him to get well and live as long as possible.'' A 23-year-old college student, who visited the palace with her boyfriend, said ``I'm a big fan of the emperor ... to me he's just an old man who is always smiling.'' Hirohito and his immediate family customarily appear on Jan. 2 behind bulletproof glass on a palace balcony in the East Garden before thousands of well-wishers waving paper red-and-white Japanese flags. The emperor's condition was stable today, with his blood pressure at 98 over 42, said a palace official, speaking on condition of anonymity. A normal reading is about 120 over 80. The 87-year-old monarch, who has been bedridden since a serious hemorrhage Sept. 19, suffered internal bleeding early today and received another transfusion, palace sources said. Hirohito has received 64.4 pints of blood since he fell ill. On Sunday, Hirohito received 2.1 pints of blood after a ``substantial'' hemorrhage, palace officials said. The imperial family's New Year appearance was last canceled between 1964 and 1968 for a major renovation of the palace. The custom, which began in 1948, was also called off in 1952 because of the death of Empress Taimyo, Hirohito's mother. Takeshi Nonogaki traveled 300 miles from Aichi prefecture in east-central Japan with his 16-year-old son Shinichi to see the registry. ``My son said he would like to see inside the palace and I thought it was important to bring him here, especially now that the emperor is gravely ill,'' said Nonogaki, 48, adding that he wanted his son to learn respect and adoration. ``I believe respecting the head of your country leads to respecting your family and your company on individual level,'' he said. 
Soldiers today demolished the homes of two Palestinians suspected of firebomb attacks and of distributing leaflets urging resistance to Israeli rule in the occupied lands, the army said. Four Palestinians were wounded in clashes with Israeli troops in towns and refugee camps in the occupied Gaza Strip, Arab news reports and hospital officials said. The army said it was checking the reports. In Arab east Jerusalem, police fired rubber bullets and tear gas to disperse Arab stone-throwers after a woman and a policeman were injured by rocks, police spokesman Rafi Levy said. The destruction of the homes in the Balata refugee camp in the occupied West Bank came a day after Israel renewed a crackdown on activists by deporting 13 Palestinians to Lebanon. It was the largest number deported on a single day in the nearly 13-month-old Palestinian uprising. Palestinians in Gaza City today shut their businesses and public transportation to protest the expulsions. Six deportees were from the Gaza Strip. The strike followed the lifting of a 24-hour curfew in the Gaza Strip. Many violated the curfew Sunday, which Arabs celebrated as the 24th anniversary of the first attack in Israel by the PLO's mainstream Fatah movement. In the West Bank, Palestinians set off firecrackers and staged parades in villages Sunday, dancing and waving pictures of PLO chief Yasser Arafat, head of the Fatah wing. The suspects from Balata whose homes were demolished are among nine in the camp detained recently who are active with the Moslem fundamentalist movement ``Hamas,'' or ``Zeal,'' an army communique said. The statement did not identify the suspects, but said the group was suspected of involvement in at least two firebombings, one on an army patrol Sept. 26 and the other on a passenger bus Oct. 18. The activists also were accused of participating in riots and distributing Hamas leaflets, the statement said. The organization is one of the underground groups active in the rebellion against Israel. Arab news reports said the houses were home to families of 10 and nine people each, and that they were bulldozed without letting families take out belongings such as furniture. At least 345 Palestinians and 14 Israelis have died since the rebellion began Dec. 8, 1987. Israel has ruled the West Bank and Gaza Strip since capturing them from Jordan and Egypt in the 1967 Middle East war. The army accused the 13 Palestinians deported on Sunday of being senior leaders of the uprising. Most of them also were members of Palestinian guerrilla groups, the army contended. The most prominent deportee was Abdallah Samhadaneh, 38, a lecturer at the Islamic University in Gaza. The military accused him of organizing a network of underground popular committees. Since the Palestinian revolt began, Israel has deported 49 Palestinians and another 12 suspected uprising leaders have received deportation orders, a military spokesman said. The United States and other countries have criticized Israel for deporting suspected Palestinian activists. In another development, Finance Minister Shimon Peres unveiled a sweeping economic recovery plan aimed at halving inflation, now at about 20 percent, by cutting $600 million from the nation's budget. A quarter of the cuts would come from defense spending. Peres, who announced the plan Sunday, said his long-range aim was to reduce unemployment, which he said hit 7 percent this year. 
Two peace activists attacked two Dutch air force jets with a sledgehammer, damaging the planes, a Defense Ministry spokesman confirmed today. The activists, one a former army chaplain, remained in military police custody on this southern Dutch air force base where the two NF-5 fighter-bombers were waiting to be flown to Turkey, the planes' next owner. The suspects were not identified in line with Dutch judicial practice. However, the Defense Ministry spokesman said one of them had been a Roman Catholic chaplain in the Dutch army before he quit in the early 1980s to protest deployment by NATO of nuclear cruise missiles in the Netherlands. Woensdrecht air force base, the missiles' planned deployment site, was the scene of numerous anti-nuclear demonstrations before last year's U.S.-Soviet pact eliminating all medium-range nuclear missiles from both Eastern and Western Europe prevented cruise deployment here. Early Sunday, the two men gained entry to the base by cutting a hole in its perimeter fence, according to the spokesman, who spoke in exchange for anonymity in line with ministry practice. Armed with a sledgehammer and an ax, they did an estimated 50,000 guilders ($25,000) damage before they were caught by a military police patrol, according to the spokesman. Dutch air force NF-5s, which have been replaced by supersonic F-16s, are scheduled for delivery to Turkey later this year. In November, activists daubed eight of them with paint here in a protest against alleged human rights abuses in Turkey. 
Rival Shiite Moslem militias today fought street battles for a third day in Beirut's southern slums and exchanged artillery and mortar fire near Israel's self-declared security zone in south Lebanon, police said. Five people were killed and 21 wounded in south Beirut, where gunmen of the mainstream Amal militia and the fundamentalist Hezbollah attacked each other with grenades and mortar barrages, police said. Today's casualties brought the overall toll to 12 killed and 29 wounded since a new round of fighting for dominance of Lebanon's million Shiites began Saturday. Amal, Arabic for hope, is backed by Syria. Hezbollah, or Party of God, is supported by Iran. Both militias accused each other of starting the clashes. Several Beirut radio stations said Syria was considering a redeployment of its 4,500 peacekeeping troops in the slums to ``improve their performance and prevent further fighting.'' The fighting was the first serious clash between Amal and Hezbollah since November, when the two sides fought for six days in west and south Beirut. Forty people were killed and 87 wounded. In May, nearly 300 people were killed and 1,000 wounded in a three-week battle between Amal and Hezbollah. It was then that Syria sent its troops into the 16-square-mile region comprised mainly of cement shanties. Police said thousands of panicked residents have been huddled in basements and bomb shelters in the embattled districts of Shiyah, Ghobeiri, Haret Hreik and Mesharafiyeh since New Year's eve. ``I hope 1989 will wipe out all these criminals and let civilized human beings live and breathe safely,'' said Umm Mohammed, a housewife reached by telephone in Haret Hreik. In south Lebanon, police said Amal and Hezbollah gunners poured mortar fire and Katyusha rockets on each other's strongholds in Iklim el-Tuffah, or Apple Province. The region stretches from the port of Sidon to the security zone, which Israel established in 1985 after withdrawing the bulk of its troops following a three-year invasion. A Hezbollah communique charged that Amal's forces launched a two-pronged, pre-dawn assault from strongholds southeast of Sidon on Hezbollah's positions in and around Mount Safi, just north of the security zone. ``With God's help, our fighters stood fast and repulsed the assailants after two hours of heavy fighting,'' the communique said. The attackers then ``clamped a siege on the area, preventing food and water supplies from going in,'' it said. The communique said Hezbollah's fighters in the area were all from the Islamic Resistance Front, a loose coalition of Moslem factions locked in guerrilla warfare against Israeli forces in the security zone. A terse Amal communique accused Hezbollah of firing first. Police had no immediate casualty report from the south Lebanon clash, the first in the area since a four-day battle in April that left 62 people killed and 150 wounded. 
Scandinavian Airlines stepped up security in Sweden and abroad after receiving a terrorist threat, officials said today. SAS, the flag carrier of Sweden, Norway and Denmark, received the warning Sunday from Hungarian police through Interpol in Paris, said SAS spokesman John Herbert. He did not specify the nature of the threat, but said it was against SAS planes and its other interests, including affiliated hotels. A security alert was transmitted to about 90 international airports used by SAS aircraft, Herbert said. ``We are acting on the advice of police,'' he said without elaborating. The Stockholm daily Svenska Dagbladet said the warning came from an Iranian Shiite Moslem group, but Herbert said police gave no indication of the origin. ``We only know it was picked up in Hungary,'' he said. The Aftonbladet newspaper reported Friday that it received by mail an anonymous bomb threat against SAS domestic flights in Sweden in connection with the visit last month to Stockholm of Palestine Liberation Organization chairman Yasser Arafat. SAS passengers at Arlanda International Airport north of Stockholm were asked to identify their luggage on the tarmac Sunday, delaying flights for up to 30 minutes. Security at Arlanda already has been increased for U.S. airlines following the Dec. 21 bombing of a Pan Am jumbo jet over Scotland in which at least 270 people died. 
Lebanese militia leader Antoine Lahd was released from a hospital in northern Israel today, nearly two months after being shot twice in an assassination attempt, a hospital spokesman said. The 61-year-old Lahd will spend the next few days resting in a hotel in Haifa before returning to Lebanon, said Dr. Albert Setinger, deputy director of Rambam hospital in Haifa, where Lahd was treated. Lahd heads the South Lebanon Army, an Israeli-backed 2,000-man militia that operates in Israel's self-declared security zone in southern Lebanon. Israel established the zone in 1985 when it withdrew most of its forces from Lebanon after a three-year invasion. Lahd was shot in the upper arm and chest by his wife's 21-year-old dance instructor on Nov. 7 while he was drinking coffee with her at his home in Marjayoun. The Lebanese National Resistance Front, a coalition of Syrian-backed leftist groups, claimed responsibility for the attack. The dance instructor is being held at the militia's Khiam prison in the security zone pending trial. One of Lahd's major blood vessels was severed by the bullets, and he received blood transfusions and was on a respirator during much of his hospitalization. Doctors originally predicted a two-week recovery but said Lahd's situation became more complicated because of the large amounts of blood loss. 
The official Libyan news agency claimed today the United States is using allegations about a chemical weapons plant in Libya as a pretext to launch an attack and kill Col. Moammar Gadhafi. The JANA news agency, monitored in Rome, referred to a report Sunday in the United Arab Emirates daily Al-Khaleej that quoted unidentified Arab sources as saying the Americans planned to send a ``hit squad'' to kill the Libyan leader during an attack. Al-Khaleej claimed an American task force had trained in Italy, Spain and aboard U.S. warships in the Mediterranean for the attack, which it said could come this month. The newspaper said the strike would include bombing attacks on the nuclear research center at Tajura and the alleged chemical weapons plant at Rabtah. The newspaper report had no dateline but appeared to originate in the Libyan capital, Tripoli. JANA gave the report unusual attention, not only carrying a story but also sending it to foreign news agencies by telex and telefax. ``The uncovering of this terrorist plan reveals and exposes clearly the real motives and dimensions of the hysterical campaign'' against Libya, JANA said. It said the report proves the U.S. allegations about a chemical weapons plant ``were excuses and pretexts for an operation of premeditated individual murder.'' The U.S. government has contended Libya is on the verge of producing chemical weapons at the plant near Rabtah, a city about 50 miles southwest of Tripoli. Libya insists the facility is a pharmaceutical plant. West German officials are investigating U.S. charges that a West German company played a key role in helping Libya build the plant. President Reagan has said the United States had discussed with other NATO countries the possibility of military action against the plant. ``We are confident that the public opinion after knowing these facts will stand on our side...,'' said JANA, referring to the Al-Khaleej report. JANA repeatedly has carried denials by Gadhafi's government that the plant produces chemical weapons as well as statements of Libya's commitment to treaties to ban such weapons. On Christmas Eve, Gadhafi offered to return the body of an American pilot killed in the 1986 U.S. bombing raids on Libya. He also called for the release of two French children held hostage in Lebanon. They were later freed. JANA has carried frequent stories on ``massive demonstrations'' in Libyan cities to denounce the U.S. threats and show support for the government. On Monday, it said a group it called the International League in Defense of the Mediterranean condemned the sailing of a new U.S. 13-ship carrier battle group for the Mediterranean. A U.S. Navy spokesman in Washington called the sailing a routine deployment of the 6th Fleet. A Navy spokesman in Italy said the new group comes at the time of the normal rotation of the ships in the Mediterranean. 
A top Cabinet minister said today that Israel's latest deportation of Palestinians violates human rights, obstructs Middle East peace efforts and runs counter to the Jewish state's own interests. The criticism coincided with the disclosure that the Egyptian and Israeli foreign ministers will meet in Paris on Sunday. Egypt is the only Arab state that has diplomatic relations with Israel. Butros Ghali, minister of state for foreign affairs, took Israel to task in a statement to reporters on the expulsion of 13 Palestinians from the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza to Lebanon. The action Sunday brought to 49 the number of Palestinians deported since an uprising against Israeli occupation began Dec. 8, 1987. Egyptian leaders condemned earlier deportations in terms similar to those used today by Ghali. As Ghali spoke, Foreign Ministry sources said Foreign Minister Esmat Abdel-Meguid will meet in Paris next Sunday with his Israeli counterpart, Moshe Arens. It will be their first meeting since Arens, a member of the right-wing Likud bloc, took the foreign affairs portfolio in the Cabinet formed by Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir last month. The last meeting at this level took place about three months ago in New York between Abdel-Meguid and Shimon Peres, then Israel's foreign minister. Peres, of the center-left Labor Party, is now finance minister. Arens and Abdel-Meguid will meet during a Jan. 7-11 international conference on the prevention of chemical weapons that both ministers are attending in Paris. Ghali said Egypt viewed the deportations as ``violations of the human rights of Palestinians and a negative stance that obstructs the (Arab-Israeli) peace process.'' He said the expulsions also ``encourage extremist tendencies among the various parties and conflict with the interests of the Israeli people in taking advantage of available opportunities and a new climate for peace efforts.'' This apparently referred to last month's peace strategy announced by Yasser Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization. Arafat publicly recognized Israel, renounced what he said was all forms of terrorism and offered to hold peace talks with Israel within the framework of an international conference. Arafat's statements led the United States to open a dialogue with the PLO. 
A State Department official and a member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee disagreed today on whether the United States needs a new policy on Cuba. ``I don't think we need a new policy. I think the policy's working,'' said Elliott Abrams, assistant secretary of state for inter-American affairs. ``It's a policy of putting pressure on (Cuban President Fidel) Castro to isolate him, to make his economic situation more difficult, to try to force him out of Angola, to try to force him to make human rights concessions. That's what's working,'' Abrams said on the ABC-TV program ``Good Morning America.'' But Rep. Robert Torricelli, D-N.J., interviewed on the same program, said ``to have an American policy that is basically based on the idea that we wish the revolution didn't happen, we wish that he'd go away, is really foolish going into a fourth decade.'' Torricelli said he thinks a policy is needed that would require some reforms from Castro in exchange for an improved relationship with the United States, a policy that ``puts a real price on a new relationship, a real price on his policies in Nicaragua and Angola and human rights at home. We may find that that gets some results.'' Castro, celebrating the 30th anniversary of his revolution, said in a televised speech Sunday night that it is ``socialism or death'' for Cuba, as he rejected market-oriented economic reforms. His remarks seemed aimed at the Soviet Union and other Communist countries that have been abandoning strict adherence to Marxist doctrine. Torricelli said that ``despite the rhetoric, I think there's some reason to believe there can be change.'' He said ``the difficulty here is that he doesn't understand what necessarily is required for better relations. And what (President-elect) Bush should be doing is spelling that out exactly. We want some change of policy in Nicaragua, we want him to continue to adhere to not aiding violent revolution in Latin America, we want the Angolan accords fulfilled, we want his promises kept on immigration, we want human rights changes in Cuba.'' Abrams said that if Castro wants a changed relationship with the United States, ``probably his first real step has got to be implementing'' the Angola agreement ``and taking the troops out.'' But, Abrams said, he thinks Castro is ``a first generation communist leader...who is unable to countenance a reduction in his personal power, real democracy, real change. It will take the next generation coming, I think, for there to be real change in Cuba.'' 
Jim and Tammy Faye Bakker returned to television today after a two-year absence with a show broadcast from the living room of their borrowed home to a handful of stations around the country. ``Jim, I think this is probably the happiest day of my life,'' Mrs. Bakker said as the show began. Sporting her trademark heavy eye makeup, she began crying two minutes into the hourlong show. Bakker, the founder of PTL, left his television ministry in March 1987 in the midst of a sex and money scandal. He and his wife had not appeared on a television pulpit since January 1987. Today, Bakker told viewers and his supporters crowded into the house that his last television appearance was to break ground for the Crystal Palace Church at Heritage USA, the home of PTL. ``I believe that was the last straw for Satan,'' Bakker said. ``I think the devil was mad that something so beautiful was being built. ... I believe the devil said, `I have to smash Jim and Tammy Bakker.''' Bakker said he believes that church, which was designed to hold 30,000 people, still will be built. But since the Bakkers left the PTL organization, it has filed for protection under federal bankruptcy laws, and last month a bankruptcy judge ordered its assets sold to a Canadian businessman. Also last month, Bakker and a former top aide were indicted on charges including fraud and conspiracy. Bakker thanked a supporter who had donated the money to put him back on the air, and said the program would be carried by more stations next month. It is scheduled to be shown Monday through Friday. ``We bought time,'' Mrs. Bakker said. ``We had a certain amount of money and that's all the time we could buy, and it's not a lot of money, but it got us back on the air and we are so grateful.'' Bakker did not make any direct appeal for donations, in marked contrast to his old ```PTL Club'' show. He did give an address in Fort Mill, S.C., ``if you want to write us.'' Callers to a telephone number _ not toll-free _ shown throughout the show were asked to give their name, phone number and address but got no appeal for funds. The callers were invited to ask the Bakkers to pray for them. Bakker, who turned 49 today, said the program was being carried by television stations in Los Angeles, Philadelphia, Albany, N.Y.; Akron and Canton, Ohio; Asheville, N.C.; and Louisiana. In Amsterdam, N.Y., near Albany, WOCD general manager Fred Wuenschel said the Bakkers paid ``the usual rate per hour'' to be on the station. He wouldn't say what that was. The station has a 30-day contract for the show. He said he will keep the show on ``as long as they keep paying.'' The only mention of Bakker's legal troubles came when the guest on the show, former PTL songwriter Mike Murdock, said he wrote one song in a lawyer's office. Murdock said he knew Bakker ``didn't know anything about lawyers.'' ``Oh no-o-o-o,'' Bakker said with a chuckle. Bakker said he had a message for ``hurting people'' and that viewers should keep their faith no matter what crisis they were facing. ``If Jim and Tammy can survive their holocaust of the last two years, then you can make it,'' Bakker said. 
Chef Albert Grabham cooked the most expensive dish of his career New Year's Day: his restaurant's profits from the night before. Grabham hid the money collected on Saturday night in an oven, but forgot about it the next day when he turned on the oven to cook lunch. The smell of burning pound notes wafted through the New House Hotel in west Wales before Grabham realized what he had done. By the time he reached the oven, more than $360 had gone up in smoke. ``The notes had burned to a cinder, the box had melted and the coins were stuck fast,'' he said Monday. ``I could not face walking up four flights of stairs to put the money away properly. We had had a busy night and I was whacked.'' ``Now I am having to put up with jokes from customers, like hot money and crisp bread,'' he said. ``It serves me right I suppose.'' Grabham said he hopes his bank will understand, and accept any identifiable remains. Hotel owner Hilary Ward said: ``There was such a mess we cannot be sure how much money was in there in the first place.'' 
The home of cricket is taking the first step toward opening its most sacred doors to women. In a newsletter to its 18,000 members, the Marylebone Cricket Club asked the question unheard in its 202-year history: ``Should MCC consider the election of lady members?'' Marylebone is one of just two men-only clubs left in top-flight English cricket. Women can watch cricket at Lord's, the club's headquarters, but not from the Pavilion, which is limited to members only. Not even women accompanying male members are allowed. The newsletter noted that England's national women's cricket team even had played matches at Lord's and that the Pavilion and club-like Long Room had been opened to women on those occasions. ``As we approach the 21st centruy, should this `progress' be taken further?'' the newsletter asked. It also sought to reassure diehard supporters of the men-only rules that no women members were likely anytime soon, not with a waiting list of about 8,000. ``With the current waiting list, none would be elected for some time but should we allow ladies to watch some cricket from the Pavilion, either as members or as guests of members?'' the newsletter asked. Last month, the Lancashire Cricket Club in Manchester voted to remain all-male, defeating a proposal to allow women members. 
An unofficial historian says he would like to dispute some of the writings of Alexander Solzhenitsyn but the work of the Nobel Prize-winning author of ``The Gulag Archipelago'' remains off-limits in the Soviet Union. In the interview published Sunday in the newspaper Moscow Young Communist, Roy Medvedev did not detail his criticism of Solzhenitsyn. Both writers have examined the Russian Revolution and the mass repression of Josef Stalin. Solzhenitzyn's three-volume ``Gulag'' is a detailed chronicle of Stalin's labor camps. Medvedev, who is widely known abroad but has seen his own articles published in the Soviet Union only in the past year, said negotiations are under way to publish all or parts of many of his own books, including works on Stalin and on his successors, Nikita S. Khrushchev and Leonid I. Brezhnev. The journal Znamya plans to publish the first part of his new book on Stalin, ``Let History Judge,'' in its first issue this year, Medvedev said. The entire book is slated for ``express'' production by Progress Publishers. But Medvedev said there is still no chance for the one book he would really like to publish here, titled ``Polemics with Solzhenitsyn.'' It consists of six or seven critical essays on the basic works of Solzhenitsyn. ``It's too bad that everything connected with this writer remains a closed area,'' Medvedev said. ``We mine gold from dirt and rock, picking out the best, washing to find the gold,'' Medvedev said. ``It's the same here. Solzhenitsyn must be published. And criticized.'' Soviet intellectuals have called for publication of Solzhenitsyn's works. But the Kremlin ideology chief, Vadim Medvedev, said in November that publishing ``Gulag Archipelago'' and Solzhenitsyn's history of Vladimir Lenin's life just before the Russian Revolution ``would undermine the foundations on which today's life rests.'' The ideology chief, who is not related to the historian, said Solzhenitsyn's writing ``radically contradicts our social and political system, our understanding of the world, of history, our attitude toward Lenin.'' Solzhenitsyn traces Stalin's widescale repression back to Lenin, who is revered in the Soviet Union. Medvedev said his books ``The Troubled Spring of 1918,'' on the beginning of the Soviet Civil War and the socialist system, and another on ``Those Who Stood Around Stalin'' also are scheduled for publication. 
A man who robbed a bank left documents for his wife's car loan at the teller's window, police said. A man walked into the Key Bank in Syracuse on Friday and handed a teller a note demanding that she put $100 bills in an envelope. No weapon was displayed, police said. After getting the money, he ran out, leaving behind an envelope containing papers for a car loan in the name of Marcia Leonard. Police arrested Gary R. Leonard, 34, of Syracuse on Sunday after reviewing photographs from the bank's security cameras, police said. He remained in jail Monday and was to be arraigned Monday on charges of third-degree robbery, police said. 
Chinese paramilitary forces beat and used electric truncheons on African students during a five-hour attack on 140 foreign students at a Nanking guest house, witnesses said Monday. An African diplomat, Gobo Bio Mamah of Benin, also reported allegations that Chinese militiamen stripped and administered electric shocks to students during Saturday's attack. ``We have heard that they were made to walk almost naked in the cold as police poked them with electric cattle prods,'' Mamah said. ``They were doing this to make them talk. It appears to be torture.'' Mamah also said a Benin student had been sentenced, without trial, to 15 days in prison following a bloody Dec. 24 clash between Chinese and Africans in Nanking. It was the first report a second African had been arrested in with the brawl that left 11 Chinese and two Africans injured. The fight between Chinese and African students at Hehai University touched off five days of anti-black protests in Nanking, capital of Jiangsu province. A student from Mali said he saw Chinese forces at the guest house Saturday using the electric prods all over the the foreigners' bodies, including their genitals. ``They put their electric sticks everywhere but mostly on our sexes,'' said Daouda Diakite, a 24-year-old student at Nanking University. ``Luckily, I succeded in defending myself. I had friends around me.'' ``They treated us like animals,'' said another African, student at the Nanking Pharmaceutical College. ``They used an electric baton on my face.'' A Japanese student at Nanking University said the police were ``brutal'' but she said she did not see them use their electric batons. None of the allegations could be independently confirmed. An American TV crew outside the guest house during the attack was prevented from entering. Chinese authorities say they are ``not clear'' about what happened at the guest house. The problems in Nanking and in another Chinese city, Hangzhou, are the latest in a series of incidents between Chinese and 1,500 African students brought here to demonstrate China's solidarity with the Third World. Relations between the two have been tense. Chinese are often openly racist and Africans are frustrated by a culture that is very different than their own. Chinese and African students fought at Hehai on Christmas Eve after gatekeepers refused to allow two Chinese women to attend a dance given by black African students. Anti-black protests followed and most of Nanking's 139 African students fled to the Nanking train station. They wanted to go to Beijing but were stopped by about 150 police. On Dec. 26, People's Armed Police, a paramilitary group, forced the students to the guest house. The following day, diplomats from nine African countries came to Nanking to speak with the students. An agreement was made to keep the students in the guest house until the diplomats returned this week, according to Y.N. Ohene-Akrasi, minister counsellor at the Ghanian Embassy. But on Saturday, the Chinese broke the agreement, he said. African students said about 400 Chinese militiamen attacked the students in the guest house. Students fought off the Chinese, throwing plates at them from the dining hall, but soon realized that they were outnumbered, Diakite said. The students then agreed to leave the dining hall and gather in a courtyard. One African witness at Nanking Polytechnical College said police charged the students, and another said he saw about seven police beating one student from the Congo. ``I saw people, only men, naked, being shocked by the Chinese and their weapons,'' Diakite said. ``They shocked women, too, though. Also on their sexes.'' Witnesses said Chinese ``arrested'' six to eight African students from Hehai. Chinese reports said one Ghanian student, Alex Dzabaku Dosoo, had been arrested and three other students held for questioning. No mention was made of a student from Benin. But the Benin diplomat said that on Sunday officials from the Ministry of Public Security in Beijing told him student Ludovic Dossoumon had been sentenced to 15 days in prison as ``punishment'' without trial. Chinese authorities in Beijing refused to specify Dossoumon's alleged crimes, Mamah said. ``They told me the authorities in Nanking were the only ones who could say anything,'' he said. Chinese authorities at the Ministry of Public Security said they were ``not clear'' about the arrests. On Monday, at least 50 students from Hehai remained at the guest house, apparently because they still wanted to go to Beijing. Those who hadn't been returned to their schools apparently had been moved to another hotel. Meanwhile in Hangzhou, capital of Zhejiang province, a standoff continued between 56 black Africans and Chinese at the Zhejiang Agricultural College. The students have locked themselves in their dormitory since last week because they allege Chinese officials say they all have AIDS. College officials have denied the claim. 
The 100th Rose Parade got under way today with floats that showed off Polynesian dancers, a grateful Vietnam refugee and a couple who exchanged wedding vows in front of 1 million spectators and a TV audience estimated at 300 million. Halfway across the nation, 650 pompon dancers opened today's Cotton Bowl parade in Dallas, a flashier event than in previous years as the city sought to make the pageant competitive with the Rose and Orange parades. Half a million people jammed downtown Miami to watch floats, stars, bands and 20 circus elephants in the 55th Annual King Orange Jamboree Parade on New Year's Eve. And 22,000 marchers _ some dressed as rabbits, Mexican senoritas or California raisins _ strutted their stuff in snow for 52,700 hardy spectators of Philadelphia's 89th annual Mummers parade. People began lining the 5{-mile parade route Saturday morning. Police Lt. Gregg Henderson called the crowd better behaved than last year's. As of 8 a.m. 177 people had been arrested, most for drunkenness. The parade began promptly at 8 a.m. under picture-perfect, sunny skies and temperatures warming into the 60s. The grand marshal was Shirley Temple Black, 60, who enjoyed the same honor 50 years ago when she was Hollywood's child acting sensation. Black recently admitted she's allergic to roses, and she had plenty to sneeze at: more than 20 million roses, chrysanthemums, orchids, carnations, marigolds, irises, daffodils, tulips and other blooms. The first Rose Parade was held in 1890, when the Valley Hunt Club treated the town to a rose-petal-covered procession of horse-and-buggy teams. The 1989 edition featured 275 horses, 20 marching bands and 60 floats _ including its tallest ever, a 70-foot creation depicting a roller-skating giraffe pulling a giant calliope. It won a trophy for the most original float. On a float dubbed ``Romance in California,'' Carie Humphries, 21, and Ron Simms, 23, recited wedding vows before what was said to be the largest audience ever to witness a marriage ceremony. Some of the TV audience of 300 million watched the festivies wearing special 3-D Fox Television glasses. Vietnamese refugee Vinh Nguyen, riding the Home Savings of America float, said: ``I feel very great. I'm really happy. It's the best New Year's I have ever had.'' Eighteen floats won trophies. Unocal's ``Mardi Gras,'' depicting a giant masked reveler with a 26-foot headdress, was the Sweepstakes winner as the most beautiful float. Rose Queen Charmaine Beth Shryock traveled with her court in a float followed by another reuniting many former Rose Queens, including 80-year-old Holly Halsted Balthis, who was the parade's monarch in 1930. After the parade, the University of Southern California and the University of Michigan were to meet in the Rose Bowl. In Dallas, a float containing a 24-foot rabbit popping out a magician's hat won the theme prize for the bigger-than-ever Cotton Parade. It was an appropriate symbol for the event, which organizers hoped to jazz up by tripling the pageant's 1989 budget to $225,000. Some 100,000 spectators gathered for the parade under overcast skies and 55-degree weather, and millions more watched an hour of the event on TV. ``We have a one-hour shot to show that Dallas is not in the dumps,'' said parade chairman Ward Lay. Thirteen floats, three giant balloon figures, 15 bands and five equestrian units followed a new route mapped to avoid shadows from downtown buildings. The grand marshal was country singer Charley Pride. Following the parade, the University of Arkansas and the University of California, Los Angeles, will square off in the Cotton Bowl. The University of Miami plays the University of Nebraska in the Orange Bowl tonight, but Miami had its parade New Year's Eve. Sherman Hemsley, star of TV's ``Amen,'' wore flashing sunglasses and was backed up by three female singers on a float celebrating Ben Franklin and electricity. Other celebrity participants included actor Raymond Burr, ``L.A. Law'' star Susan Ruttan and ``Cheers'' star George Wendt. Marilyn McCoo and Joe Garagiola were the masters of ceremonies. Philadelphians lining the 2{-mile Mummers parade route on New Year's Day were treated to 14 hours of string bands competing for more than $286,000 in prize money and clowns who cakewalked to the event's perennial theme, ``Oh, Dem Golden Slippers.'' Mummery, the prancing and wearing of masks and costumes for the sheer fun of it, traces its origins back 2,400 years to the Greek god Momus. In Philadelphia, the first formal parade was in 1901, but neighborhood parades go back to at least 1877. Some clowns wore traditional garb, but others dressed more topically, suiting up as President Reagan and talk show hosts Morton Downey Jr., Geraldo Rivera and Oprah Winfrey. ``Anything goes in this parade,'' said Philadelphian Lucille Hart, attending her 20th Mummers parade. About 50 miles to the southwest, tiny Middletown, Del., spoofed the Mummers with its Hummers Parade despite rain and snow. About 200 spectators were entertained by 100 marchers, including participants dressed as Betty Crocker, Father Time and Baby 1989. 
The 101st Congress ceremonially convenes for its bicentennial session on Tuesday, firmly in the hands of Democrats waiting to see whether the incoming Republican president will be more conciliatory than the departing one. ``We both know there will be things on which we can't agree,'' House Speaker Jim Wright, D-Texas, said after a post-election meeting with president-elect Bush. But he added that Bush was ``a realist'' interested in forging a better link with Congress. The Capitol Hill-White House relationship will be tested throughout the year as lawmakers grapple with the obstinate problem of the federal budget deficit and seek to map a new path for domestic and foreign policy. But the first difficult item to confront lawmakers will be whether to give themselves as much as a $45,000 pay raise. While there is some new leadership on Capitol Hill _ most prominently George Mitchell of Maine as the new Senate Majority Leader _ the new Congress will look a lot like the last one. Better than 98 percent of House incumbents and 92 percent of sitting senators who sought re-election will return for another term. This year's freshman class is the smallest in history. Eleven new senators _ five Democrats and six Republicans _ will take the oath of office as the first order of business when the chamber convenes. The number includes Republican Rep. Dan Coats of Indiana, appointed to replace vice-president elect Dan Quayle, who was resigning before his Jan. 20 inauguration to let Coats be sworn in early. In the House, 33 freshmen will be sworn in, 17 Democrats and 16 Republicans. They include Georgia Democrat Ben Jones, who played ``Cooter'' on TV's ``The Dukes of Hazzard,'' mountain climber Jolene Unsoeld, D-Wash., and attorney and political novice Ronald Machtley, the Rhode Island Republican who knocked off scandal-tainted Democratic veteran Fernand St Germain. House Speaker Jim Wright, D-Texas, will be re-elected to a second term as speaker, despite two ethics investigations into his finances and his alleged disclosure of classified information. Wright's first-day speech to the House will set the tone for the new session. It is a day not of substance, but of ceremony. The visitors galleries on both sides of the Capitol will be filled with lawmakers' families. There will be socializing, picture taking and handshaking. A few routine housekeeping details will be taken care of in both chambers, including the organizing of committees and the adoption of rules. Tuesday's ceremonies and festivities will be followed by the formal counting of presidential electoral votes on Wednesday. The Senate will convene, then march as a body across the long corridor to the House chamber. There, Bush _ acting in his constitutional role as president of the Senate _ will open the certificates sent in from each state, announce them in alphabetical order, and declare himself the winner. After two days in Washington, the new Congress will leave again, and not come back until Inauguration Day, Jan. 20. Real business gears up the following week, and while Bush may enjoy a limited ``honeymoon'' period, partisan struggle lurks not far below the surface. Bush's first challenge will be to outline for Congress his budget priorities and to show how he would save the $32 billion or so necessary to meet deficit-reduction targets. He has pledged to do it without raising taxes, and Democrats have been skeptical about whether that can be accomplished. For their part, Democrats will be anxious to set their own policy course in many areas. With a 55-45 majority in the Senate, a one-seat gain from last year, and the House at 260-175, three better than the 100th Congress, the majority party believes it has as much a mandate as the new president. Leading the way will be two new Budget Committee chairmen: Leon Panetta, D-Calif., in the House and Jim Sasser, D-Tenn., in the Senate. Other new chairmanships will go to Rep. Jack Brooks, D-Texas, at the Judiciary Committee; Rep. Henry Gonzalez, D-Texas, and Sen. Don Riegle, D-Mich., at the Banking committees; former Majority Leader Robert Byrd, D-W.Va., as head of Senate Appropriations; and Rep. John Conyers, D-Mich., House Government Operations. In addition to the budget, another early and difficult issue for the new Congress will be where to set its own pay. A presidential commission has recommended 50 percent salary hikes for lawmakers and some 2,500 other top government officials in the executive and judicial branches. President Reagan's budget, due on Capitol Hill Jan. 9, will likely include an increase. If both the House and Senate do not vote to stop it, whatever Reagan recommends will automatically take effect on Feb. 8. House leaders have said they plan to let the raise happen, but have promised to expedite a ban on honoraria, the special-interest speaking fees earned by many legislators. Senate committees also will face the immediate task of holding confirmation hearings on members of Bush's cabinet and other top administration appointees. Hearings on former Sen. John Tower's nomination to be Secretary of Defense have been tentatively scheduled for Inauguration week, and the Foreign Relations Committee is expected to hold early hearings on James Baker's nomination as Secretary of State. The 101st Congress is called the bicentennial Congress because it will be meeting during the 200th anniversary of the date when the first Congress was finally able to muster a quorum and officially convene on April 6, 1789. 
Cable television systems are offering more channels to more viewers, but the price for watching is also going up. In the two years since most cable systems were freed from municipal rate regulation, their basic service rates have risen substantially. However, stability in premium channel rates, which were never regulated, has moderated the increase in the average overall cable bill. The Consumer Price Index for the 12 months through November shows that cable TV bills for urban viewers rose 13.3 percent, while the overall index rose 4.2 percent during the period. The cable increase during the previous year was 6.85 percent. Other trackers of cable prices, however, show different figures. Paul Kagan Associates, a Carmel, Calif., research firm that compiles nationwide cable prices, says the monthly rate for basic cable rose about 10 percent, from a monthly average of $13.20 last year to $14.52 in 1988. With premium channels added in, average monthly cable bills rose 5.6 percent over 1987 to $24.73, a rate only slightly higher than inflation, the firm says. Those in the industry say that for the two decades before deregulation took effect in January 1987, municipalities kept basic service rates artificially low. With the freedom to charge what the market will bear, cable systems have added more channels to the basic tier and raised prices. Sharon Armbrust, a senior analyst at Kagan, said the trend in steep increases for basic service is a ``two-year phenomenon'' that already shows signs of stabilizing. ``Regular rates will track fairly closely with inflation and perhaps outpace it simply because of the new services'' being added, she said. ``There could be a consumer backlash if charges go up without new services, but cable operators are sensitive to this. It's a subscription service _ you vote every month whether to buy it.'' For some systems, rates are still taking healthy leaps upward. Cable TV Arlington in Virginia is raising its monthly rate for basic service _ 54 channels _ by 11.1 percent to $19.95. That increase comes on top of an 18 percent increase last August. Media General Cable of Fairfax, Va., is raising its rate for basic service of 83 channels by nearly 19 percent to $18.95. It last raised its rates a year ago. On the more moderate side, TeleCommunications Inc., the nation's largest cable company operating systems with more than 4 million subscribers, says it will raise its basic monthly rates an average of 7 percent in 1989, to an average $15.50. So far, consumers appear to be doing little more than shrugging their shoulders at the increases. The number of homes subscribing to cable service grew this year by about 8 percent to 48.6 million _ representing 53.8 percent of all U.S. television households. About 80 percent of all homes are wired for cable. ``People value television choice in their home, they want to have a lot of channels and they're willing to pay for it,'' said Charles E. Walters, vice president of a Washington, D.C.-based consulting firm. Decker Anstrom, executive vice president of the National Cable Television Association, says cable packs a lot of entertainment value for the price. ``Rates are increasing, but if you look at the overall universe, cable is priced quite reasonably,'' he said. ``For about 50 cents a day, the average cable subscriber receives 35 channels. It's a good entertainment buy.'' These arguments have been made to Congress but have failed to assure some, including Sen. Howard Metzenbaum, D-Ohio, that consumers' interests rather than a bottom line are being served by cable companies. Metzenbaum plans to introduce legislation in the upcoming session to strengthen the ability of cities to regulate cable rates, said Eddie Correia, an aide to the senator. The deregulation that took hold in 1987 precluded rate regulation in virtually every metropolitan area under the theory that systems in heavily populated areas face competition from other media sources, including many over-the-air broadcast signals. But, Correia said, even in metropolitan areas, cable can lock out competition by refusing to sell its programming to other sources, like wireless cable and backyard satellite dishes. ``It's the worst of both worlds. You have monopolies but you have no ability to regulate them,'' he said. Nicholas Miller, a Washington,D.C.-based communications lawyer who represents municipalities on cable issues, also characterizes cables operators as monopolies based on their pricing practices. ``They price based on what people are willing to pay, not what it costs them to deliver the service,'' he said. 
The man wearing the visitor card around his neck carried a large framed poster showing George Bush above a 1989 calendar. ``I dream of a kinder and gentler nation,'' read the caption. Alas, politicos and souvenir hunters trying to capture a little of the bicentennial inaugural spirit will not get a chance to buy that poster. Like the George Bush salad plate, the red-white-and-blue pompons, the horned hat and the one that ballooned into something resembling the Pillsbury doughboy, it did not pass muster with the Presidential Inaugural Committee. ``Everything in here is eminently tasteful,'' promotion director Jill Collins said of the 16-page commemorative catalog due for mailing this week to 1.5 million Republicans, historians and collectors. In other inauguration news, with less than three weeks to I-Day: _The Fresh-Up Lounge, a 20-year tradition, announced it will once again serve ``the grooming and personal needs of media men and women'' covering the inaugural. Those needs apparently range from haircuts, Band-Aids and food to a Color Vision Computer. ``See yourself in a variety of hair colors,'' urges the press release issued by sponsors Clairol and Bristol Myers. _Nearly 2,200 bottles of Korbel champagne, the official champagne of the Bush inauguration, were delivered to inaugural headquarters. (Official inaugural candy bars are in the works). _The Mormon Tabernacle Choir has agreed to perform at a musical prelude to the Jan. 20 inaugural ceremony. _The Postal Service will make special I-Day stamp cancellations in six cities _ Milton, Mass.; Greenwich, Conn.; Houston; Kennebunkport, Maine; Huntington, Ind., and Indianapolis. Why? Hint: Bush was born in the first and raised in the second, started a business in the third and vacations in the fourth; the last two have something to do with Vice President-elect Quayle. _Some 60,000 invitations to inaugural events are out, gone, finis. That leaves a mere 400,000 to mail, but there's no rush. They're commemoratives that won't admit anyone to anything. ``I've seen them framed on walls all over the country,'' insists committee spokesman Ed Cassidy. ``They are extremely popular.'' For those who aren't even on the commemorative list, the inaugural catalog offers consolations ranging in price from 95 cents to $1,195. The cheapest item is a schoolbook cover depicting Bush and George Washington in keeping with the inaugural's bicentennial ``George To George'' theme. At the top end of the scale, devotees can purchase eagles _ $1,195 for Steuben glass or Boehm china. For couch potatoes and the politically unconnected, the committee is offering for $29.95 a VCR tape that promises buyers the inaugural bicentennial ``captured for years of enjoyment and historical significance.'' Hollywood producer Jerry Weintraub, a Bush supporter, is making the tape. Half of the one-hour tape will be historical and the other half will hit the high points of the Bush-Quayle inauguration, according to Stephen Studdert, executive director of the committee. He said all schools in the country will be given a copy. For the tradition-bound, the catalog offers the usual medals _ ranging from $29.50 for a bronze art medal to $920 for a collectors' set _ and inaugural license plates, available for $50 and usable in any state until March 31. But not everything in the catalog is generic. Some items have been chosen to reflect the incoming president's tastes and background _ horseshoe belt buckles and key rings, Texas chili mix and coasters made of Maine slate; golf shirts and Navy-style caps like the ones he wears. You won't find official inaugural dried pork rinds. You will find commemorative blazer buttons, but officials strenuously deny that they are there to recall Bush's preppie image _ a distinct liability early in his White House campaign. No, blazer buttons have an important place in inaugural history. Seems George Washington wore special buttons engraved with the arms of the new government at his inaugural ceremony. This year's set, 10 brass buttons for $65, is engraved with the bicentennial inaugural seal. Most of the cost of the inauguration _ expected to top $20 million _ will come from ball and gala ticket sales. But the committee hopes to net more than $2 million from its catalog items. 
One hundred professors and other prominent personalities have signed a petition asking the government for open elections to parliament in 1989, spokesmen for the group said Monday. The petition, presented to the government ombudsman's office Dec. 30 and given to Western news agencies, said that any citizen should have the right to run for the Sejm, or parliament, after being nominated by a certain portion of eligible voters. For example, the group said, signatures by 1 percent of a district's electorate could be sufficient to nominate a candidate. Under Poland's current arrangement, nominations to parliament elections are controlled by the Communist Party, which in effect determines how many seats go to communists, to allied political parties and to non-party members. Communists have always received an automatic majority of the seats since the party consolidated power in Poland after World War II and held the first postwar parliament elections in 1947. Elections are planned this year after the drafting of a new election law. Deputies serve four-year terms and the last elections were held in October 1985. In his New Year's Eve message to the nation, Polish leader Wojciech Jaruzelski said he would like the new parliament to ``more clearly reflect the natural differentiation of attitudes and views within society.'' Among those signing the petition to the ombudsman were film director Andrzej Wajda; the rector of Warsaw University, Grzegorz Bialkowski; the leader of the Polish Economic Society, Aleksander Paszczynski; and leader of the Polish PEN Writer's Club, Julius Zulawski. Those who signed included 54 professors. Many were members of a recently formed Citizen's Committee designed to bring the mainstream of the Polish opposition movement into one structure. 
Where most people list their job experiences, Operation Rescue founder Randall Terry's resume brags, ``Arrested 26 times in seven cities.'' Terry complains it's out-of-date. ``It might be closer to 30 right now,'' the 29-year-old activist said during an interview at the unmarked storefront office in upstate New York where the latest protests against abortion are being planned. Since its national debut at the Democratic National Convention in Atlanta last summer, Operation Rescue has made abortion a high-profile issue again. Terry and his followers have blocked women from entering abortion clinics throughout the country, lying in front of doors until police carry or drag them away under the watchful eye of television cameras. Terry says he is trying to produce the ``social tension'' necessary to change abortion laws by using the non-violent 1960s civil rights protest as a model. ``He's the Martin Luther King of a movement,'' said Dominick Brignola, an Albany lawyer and footsoldier in the anti-abortion drive. Terry's critics claim Operation Rescue, so named because followers try to ``rescue'' the unborn, is an assault on women's rights. ``The civil rights movement was trying to gain rights for people. They're trying to take away the rights of living, breathing human beings,'' said Molly Yard, president of the National Organization for Women. More than 450 anti-abortion demonstrators clogged Atlanta jails during the five-day Democratic convention. Since then, demonstrations have spread to New York City, Indianapolis, Milwaukee, Detroit, Philadelphia and Boston and still more cities. The activists want the Supreme Court to overturn Roe vs. Wade, its 1973 decision that allows women to have abortions. An estimated 1.6 million women have abortions each year in the United States. Standing at the forefront of Operation Rescue is a used car salesman who once wanted to be a rock star. Terry and his wife, Cindy, began their crusade in 1984 by standing in front of abortion clinics, trying to talk women out of entering. Friends soon joined them, and the couple opened an office that offered women free pregnancy tests and hand-me-down baby clothes. ``God clicked a light on in my head and said it wasn't enough to just be against child-killing, that I had to do something about it,'' said Terry, who's selling his auto dealership because he is too busy with Operation Rescue. Critics concede Terry has a mesmerizing personality. He even tries to convert relatives at family reunions, said Dawn Marvin of Rochester, his aunt. Terry was reared in a low-key Protestant environment but quit high school at 17, dreaming of a career in music, said Marvin, who is communications director for the Rochester chapter of Planned Parenthood, a medical service that anti-abortion pickets frequently target. She stressed that she does not speak for the organization about her nephew. ``He went away and he flipped out,'' she said about Terry's transformation into a born-again Christian. ``He came back a totally changed personality. It was more like a cult reaction than a spiritual quest.'' Marriage and his highly public role as Operation Rescue spokesman have calmed him somewhat, she said. The Terrys have one child and three foster children. Terry dismisses his aunt's comments _ including her assessment that ``he's an egomaniac,'' lapping up news media attention. To Margaret Johnston, administrator at Southern Tier Women's Services in Binghamton, Operation Rescue is nothing new. She said anti-abortion activists have spread nails in the parking lot and glued the clinic's door shut four or five times. Terry's first arrest came in January 1986 when he chained himself to a sink at the clinic, which performs abortions. He was jailed for 22 days for refusing to pay a $60 fine. ``It doesn't matter what you say to him. There is no reason involved,'' Johnston said. ``He doesn't care about women. I think he really hates women.'' Iron pipes now prevent cars from blocking the entrance to the Binghamton clinic. A court order keeps the nearly ever-present demonstrators at shouting distance. ``They really want to make it personal,'' Johnston said. Even when she has run into him on a Saturday in the post office, Johnston said Terry has shouted at her, ``How many babies did you murder today?'' Terry criticizes the anti-abortion movement as being ``too nice'' during the 1980s, pacified by the presence of an ideological friend like President Reagan into not working hard for its goal. ``We cry that abortion is murder, it's child-killing, and yet we carry a picket once or twice a year and write a few letters,'' he said. ``That's not an adequate response to murder. A logical response to murder is physical intervention on behalf of the victim.'' The lean, bushy-haired Terry expects and even hopes his demonstrators will be arrested. He claims Operation Rescue was responsible for 11,000 arrests in 1988 and predicts 500,000 will be arrested in 1989. There are no situations, he said, when abortions are justified. ``In most areas of life it's OK for people to follow their own beliefs, but not when it comes to having innocent children murdered,'' he said. ``That's like saying, `Why can't a white man follow his own conscience concerning owning a black slave? Why can't a German follow his own conscience if he decides he wants to shoot Jews?''' Terry has attracted some prominent supporters, including former presidential candidate Pat Robertson, who said he backs ``any means short of violence'' to stop abortion. If anti-abortion demonstrators set their minds to it, Terry said, they could change abortion laws in six months because the political system is not built to deal with mass protests. Yard dismisses Terry as a ``puppet'' groomed for the role of point man in the latest anti-abortion offensive. ``Women are really outraged by the whole thing,'' she said. ``The reason they have been passive seemingly in the light of bombings (of abortion clinics) and Operation Rescue is that people don't believe Roe vs. Wade can be overturned. ... I'm not so sanguine. All I know is we have to make the biggest outcry we possibly can.'' At Operation Rescue's office, a competing outcry is being plotted. Pinned to the wall is a large map of the United States, with ``abortion mills'' dotted in red. Terry distractedly complains to a staff member about a plane flight later that afternoon that will take him to a television appearance. As a photographer snaps pictures, he removes his foot from his desk, saying ``that's too casual for someone trying to change world history.'' He adds, chuckling: ``It's comical, really. I think God has a sense of humor. Don't you think it's rather funny that a former used car salesman is heading such a movement?'' 
Almost all African nations were falling further behind the world's developed countries, the executive secretary of the United Nations' Economic Commission for Africa said Monday. The U.N. official, Adebayo Adedeji, also called for fundamental changes in structural adjustment programs mandated by major lending institutions such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. Structural adjustment programs usually require significant economic belt-tightening by nations receiving World Bank or IMF aid, and debtor nations frequently complain the measures often lead to hardship and civil unrest. Adebayo, delivering a year-end assessment to an audience of diplomats and economists at the commission's headquarters in Ethiopia's capital, said Africa's economy did not keep pace with its population growth in 1988. He predicted an even more dismal decline in 1989. Adebayo said Africa's combined economy grew at a rate of 2.5 percent in 1988, compared with 1.3 percent in 1987. However, he said, that was offset by population growth of about 3 percent. A decade-long pattern of slow economic growth coupled with rapid population increases has left the average African with an income only about 80 percent of what it was in 1980, Adebayo said. He noted that demand for African exports remains weak and said the continent's economy ``has been sapped and weakened by the burden of debt in spite of the perceptible recovery of the industrial economies.'' He put the combined debt of African nations at $230 billion at the close of 1988, compared with $218 billion in 1987. Adebayo said improved weather conditions that put an end to droughts in many parts of Africa in 1988 were expected to continue in 1989, but that resulting improvements in agriculture were likely to be offset by further declines in commodity prices. Africa's basic agricultural exports are coffee, tea, cocoa and vegetable oils. 
A suspect in the New Year's Eve shooting of a Navajo County deputy sheriff was ``pinned down'' this morning in a cabin near here and fired shots at an officer's car, authorities said. Sgt. Allan Schmidt, a spokesman for the Arizona Department of Public Safety, said shots were exchanged with one of two suspects in the fatal shooting of Deputy Bob Varner, but no one was hit. The owner of the cabin, who does not live there full time, called police this morning after he went to the cabin ``and recognized that something was amiss,'' Schmidt said. Varner died today at Barrow Neurological Center in Phoenix, where he was taken after being shot Saturday night after two men opened fire during a routine traffic stop, authorities said. The man inside the house is believed to be Douglas Savory, 45, who also is known as Douglas Savorey and Douglas Toad Wolf, Schmidt said. He said the man is armed with at least one automatic weapon. The other suspect, identified earlier as Raul Lopez, about 25, is not at the cabin. The two were believed to have split up earlier, Schmidt said. Savory told a couple who were victimized by the two suspects after the shooting Saturday that he was a survivalist and ``don't believe in hurting people, but there are times when it's necessary.'' The two had approached the home of Bud and Betty Hunt, pretending to have car trouble, and then tied up the two and took their car. The Hunts were not injured. After DPS and Navajo County authorities arrived at the cabin today, shots were fired from the house at a sheriff's patrol car, but no one was injured, Schmidt said. He said Interstate 40 was closed in both directions about 3 miles east of Winslow because the cabin where the man is holed up ``is only a few hundred yards from the highway.'' The cabin was surrounded and that at least two helicopters were being used to help keep the building under surveillance. ``We're waiting for a SWAT team from Flagstaff and developing a plan to handle this guy,'' Schmidt said. Schmidt said a California warrant from San Bernardino County accused Savory of robbery and kidnapping in a September gun-store robbery in which five other people have been arrested. Schmidt said he had no other details on the robbery. He also has been investigated in connection with manufacturing and sale of illegal weapons and explosivies, and ``he is well known to authorities at the (California) state and federal level,'' Schmidt said. He said Lopez ``may be a citizen of Mexico but we have very little on his background,'' the spokesman said. Varner apparently stopped the two suspects about 7:30 p.m. Saturday, but ``we don't know the circumstances of why he stopped that car,'' Schmidt said. There were at least 17 bullet holes in the windshield of Varner's car, Sheriff Gary Butler said. He was hit three times. 
The private papers of former British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan show his government kept secret the details of a 1957 accident at an atomic power plant that contaminated milk at about 800 farms, according to a published report. The release Sunday of Macmillan's papers marked the first time full details have been revealed about the spring 1957 accident at the Windscale nuclear plant in Cumbria, northwest England. The papers were cited in a report by The Observer, a London newspaper. The papers show that Macmillan kept the information secret because he feared shaking public confidence in the industry and jeopardizing collaboration with the United States. The Observer cited the documents as saying the accident contaminated milk with high levels of strontium 90, a deadly isotope found in radioactive fallout. The newspaper said the milk was sold to the public without any warning. In a secret memo to Macmillan on Sept. 12, 1957, Agriculture Minister John Hare estimated ``800 or more farms may be affected'' by an escape of strontium 90 and that ``the readings on some of these farms have been many times higher than the national average,'' the Observer said. It said Hare also wrote that no action was being taken ``to prevent milk being consumed or produced on farms in the area.'' The paper quoted John Dunstan, a former director of the state-run National Radiological Protection Board, as saying full details of the amount of radioactivity released in the accident were not disclosed to the board until 1986. The release of the information came in connection with an inquiry into increased childhood leukemia near the plant, now known as Sellafield. The newspaper did not report the cause of the accident and made no mention of any deaths attributed to it. Macmillan's documents were made public by the Public Records Office under rules permitting publication of selected confidential papers after 30 years. Government papers made public a year ago said Macmillan also suppressed a report on Britain's worst ever nuclear accident at Windscale on Oct. 10, 1957. The report said the accident was caused by a fire. Sales of milk from an area measuring more than 200 square miles around the plant were banned after a release of radioactivity. The accident caused no immediate deaths. The problem-plagued plant on the Irish Sea is one of the West's oldest commercial atomic power stations and largest nuclear reprocessing plants. It reprocesses used nuclear fuels from Britain and other countries to extract uranium and plutonium for making nuclear bombs. 
An exhibition of modern art from the New York and Venice Guggenheim collections drew 121,000 visitors during its display at Prague's National Gallery, officials said. On Sunday, the last day of the exhibit, it took visitors 1{ hours to make it through the line to the second floor of Sternberk Palace, where 50 paintings by 33 artists have hung since early November. The Guggenheim exhibit brought to Prague expressionist, cubist, futurist, constructivist and surrealist masterpieces. It was preceded last summer by a Czech National Gallery exhibit of 60 canvases in New York's Guggenheim Museum of Modern Art. On display in Prague were paintings by artists such as Pablo Picasso, Marc Chagall, Max Ernst, Salvador Dali, Joan Miro, Jackson Pollock and Jean Dubuffet. The two shows were based on a 1986 cultural agreement and a 10-year friendship between Guggenheim director Thomas M. Messer and Jiri Kotalik, the director of the Prague gallery. ``It's a sign of improving relations. It could not have happened five years ago,'' said Messer, adding he saw the exhibit ``not merely as an art show but as a very significant cultural event.'' ``It's the first time ever that a full survey of 20th century paintings ... has been presented in any of the socialist countries,'' he said in an interview. He noted, however, that the show focused on the period 1900-45, and that a second exhibit would be needed to show contemporary art. This thought was echoed also in some of the entries in the visitors' book and complaints that the works on show were already well-known from literature. Most, however, were grateful. ``Thank you, we ourselves are not likely to get to New York,'' wrote one visitor. Another said, ``thanks, but wish there had been more.'' There were so many visitors, up to 4,200 a day, that after a few days the gallery announced it was extending viewing time until 8 p.m. two days a week. ``Artwork necessarily creates an atmosphere of international understanding,'' wrote the trade union daily newspaper Prace. ``Art can speak with the same urgency to people throughout the world.'' The women's weekly Vlasta said, ``We can only wish that the useful international cooperation continues. After all, it brings enrichment for both countries _ for us, especially, an expansion of knowledge of the various trends of contemporary 20th century art.'' 
The Soviet Union appears bent on a political solution in Cambodia and has urged its Vietnamese allies to withdraw their occupation forces, Western and Soviet diplomats say. The Kremlin denies pressuring Vietnam to pull out, but Deputy Foreign Minister Igor A. Rogachev has called a partial withdrawal in 1988 an ``avenue toward a speedy solution'' that could improve Soviet relations with China. A summit of the two largest communist powers is expected this year, and Cambodia might head the agenda. Vietnam invaded its Southeast Asian neighbor in December 1978, ousted the bloody Khmer Rouge regime and installed another government. In Bangkok, Thailand, a Western diplomat said of the Chinese-Soviet dispute over Cambodia: ``I think they've both decided to put this one behind them, to sweep this one under the rug.'' Moscow backs Hanoi and its client regime in Phnom Penh. Beijing arms Khmer Rouge guerrillas and other rebel groups fighting that government. The Soviet Union's apparent retrenchment after a decade fits its current policy of shedding or reducing costly foreign involvements. It also does not appear to relish being Cambodia's major donor of foreign aid. ``This kind of monopoly we certainly do not like,'' said a Soviet diplomat in Phnom Penh. He said his country was especially unhappy about having to provide all Cambodia's oil, on credit. Most Western analysts believe the Soviet Union wants to retain its influence in Cambodia, Vietnam and Laos but at a level that would not antagonize China or the non-communist nations of the region, with which Moscow seeks better economic and political relations. Although the Soviet investment in Cambodia is substantial, it does not approach the amount the Kremlin has committed to Afghanistan or to neighboring Vietnam, and Moscow has not carried out pledges of reconstruction made 10 years ago. Official Cambodian media said the Soviet Union extended aid worth $133 million in 1979-80 to help overcome famine and devastation caused by nearly four years of Khmer Rouge governemtn. Aid levels are believed to have been substantially lower since, but no reliable estimates are available. Washington estimates the Soviets pour the equivalent of more than $3 billion a year into Vietnam. Several hundred Soviet advisers are stationed in Cambodia, involved in projects ranging from a ground satellite station to a veterinary medicine center. Soviet pilots fly planes of the Cambodian airline and engineers sent by the Kremlin are renovating the electric power supply system. By 1990, more than 3,500 scholarships are expected to have been provided for Cambodians studying in the Soviet Union. Most of the bill for Cambodia's army and the Vietnamese occupation force also goes to the Kremlin. Western analysts say that is an important reason the Soviets want to get the Vietnamese out and reach a political solution with rebel groups. Little Soviet blood has been shed in Cambodia and Moscow has not installed a naval base at the Kompong Som port, as some observers expected. It also has not built the roads, communications and other facilities needed in a country plagued for nearly 20 years by war, Khmer Rouge rule, invasion and insurgency. According to Soviet diplomats, their government wants to cut unnecessary items from the current aid program. They scoff at some suggestions from their aid bureaucracy, like establishing a circus or getting involved in tourism. One diplomat, noting deficiencies in the Soviet Union's own development of tourism, said the Cambodians ``saw the light'' and decided to invite Hong Kong businessmen to restore a first-class hotel in Phnom Penh. 
Two separate bus accidents killed 41 people, official Chinese news reports said Monday. The Xinhua News Agency said 31 people were killed when a bus carrying a bride and her relatives collided with a freight train Sunday in northeast China's Heilongjiang province on the Bingbei Railway Line. The bride, the bus driver and 29 others on board the bus died, the news agency said. It gave no figure for the number of people injured. The cause of the accident was under investigation, it said. In another accident, a bus carrying 46 passengers plunged into an icy river Saturday, killing 10 people and injuring 32 others, the China Daily reported. It said ``hundreds of local people, policemen and doctors'' jumped into the river to help save the passengers. Passers-by smashed the bus windows with axes and bamboo poles in the rescue effort, the newspaper said. Four were still missing, it said. The crash occurred outside of Shanghai when the bus left the road and plunged over a 24-foot-high bridge into a river. The bus landed upside down and was submerged, the report said. 
An 88-year-old man who had been feuding with the other residents of his small, cramped retirement home was accused today of killing two of them and injuring four others while they slept, authorities said. Henry Thomas, who walks with the aid of a cane, was charged with two counts of first-degree murder and was being held without bond in the Pasco County Detention Center, said Police Chief Phil Thompson. Thomas' clothes and cane were bloodstained when he was picked up Sunday evening while strolling through this city about 30 miles northeast of Tampa, police said. He was taken into custody about 12 hours after the victims' bodies were found. The injuries could have been caused by the cane but that hadn't been confirmed, he said. The bodies of Max Nickbarge, 90, and Myrtle Smith, 73, were discovered Sunday morning by two nurses at the Reflections I retirement home, one of whom had slept only a few feet away from where the attack occurred, police said. The victims apparently were asleep at the time of the attack, Thompson said. The police chief said there was bitterness between Thomas and other residents ``that had been building for some time and came to a head.'' While he didn't know the cause of the bitterness, Thompson said cramped quarters in the home, where Thomas lived with two other men in a 9-foot-by-10-foot room, may have contributed. Nickbarge was found in his bedroom, and Smith was found in the living room. The two, last seen around midnight Saturday, had been beaten about the head, neck and shoulders, police said. ``Some furniture had been overturned, and there was broken glass on the floor,'' said police Sgt. Dale Neuner. Four other people were injured, two seriously. Frank Tear Sr., 89, was listed in critical but stable condition today with a fractured skull, cuts and bruises at Tampa General Hospital. Tear is the father-in-law of Helen Tear, who owns Reflections I and a similar home nearby. Esther Kelly, 67, was in guarded condition at Humana Hospital in Dade City with two broken arms, cuts on her face and head, and bruises. Ruth Godfrey, 71, and Lucy Mitchell, 85, were both listed in fair condition with facial cuts at East Pasco Medical Center in Zephyrhills about 10 miles south of here. Godfrey also suffered a broken collarbone. Nine people lived in the home. All six victims had been sleeping in rooms near the front of the house, said Neuner. ``Some residents in the rear of the house said they heard strange noises in the night,'' Neuner said, but no one rose to investigate. The home's three other residents were transferred Sunday to Reflections II nearby. Thomas, a retired fruit picker, checked into the home after his house burned down in November, police said. Neighbors said he often collected and sold junk. 
A man and his daughter were injured Monday when they jumped from their second-floor hotel room to escape a fire, authorities said. Elio Pirrone and his daughter, Antonina Silvana, threw a mattress onto a first-floor balcony 16 feet below their room after hearing a fire alarm and seeing smoke. Pirrone, 53, suffered a dislocated shoulder, and Ms. Silvana, 20, had bruises on her leg, according to doctors at San Carlo hospital. Both also suffered smoke inhalation. The two were among only three guests at the 54-room Hotel Tiziano. The third guest and hotel employees were unhurt in the fire, which may have been caused by a short circuit. 
A 15-year-old soccer fan was hospitalized in a coma Monday after a fight between supporters of rival teams. Davide Fornaroli suffered broken bones Saturday in the violence between supporters of rival teams from Cremona and Brescia, said doctors at the Civil Hospital in this northern city. The 20-minute fight erupted after a championship match when fans of Brescia, which lost 2-0, attacked a train carrying the fans of visiting Cremona team. The Brescia supporters hurled stones at the train, smashing the windows of several cars, railway officials said. Two people were taken into custody. It was the second serious incident in the Italian soccer season. In October, a supporter of the Ascoli team died from head injuries suffered during clashes with fans of Milan's Internazionale team. Three supporters of the Milan team face murder charges. 
A passenger ferry sank off the Caribbean coast while being towed to port, and 59 people drowned and six are missing, authorities and news reports said today. Capt. Anibal Giron Arreola, a spokesman at the Puerto Barrios naval base, said the ferry Justo Rufino Barrios II sank Sunday afternoon in Amatique Bay. He said by telephone that 59 people died. Juan Jose Gaytan, a reporter at Radio Portena in Puerto Barrios, said the Justo Rufineo Barrios II ran out of fuel midway on a regular 16-mile run from the town Livingston, across the bay, to Puerto Barrios. Gaytan said the boat sank while it was being towed by a tugboat. The Spanish Embassy in Guatemala City confirmed the sinking and said a 40-year-old Spanish citizen, Vicente Daudi, was among the dead. The embassy reported his wife, Rosa Maria Arnal, and a son survived the shipwreck, but two daughters were missing. Daudi was working with a Spanish technical aid and economic development mission in Guatemala, the embassy said. An official at the Puerto Barrios morgue said 13 bodies have been identified. Besides Daudi, the nationalities of the victims were not immediately known. Gaytan said navy patrol boats, fishing vessels and private craft have been searching the bay for survivors and recovering bodies. He said he had no other details on the shipwreck. Puerto Barrios, 187 miles northeast of the capital, is Guatemala's principal east coast port. 
An Armenian newspaper has printed an alleged threat by Armenian militants to wage terrorist attacks with U.S.-made Stinger missiles if their leaders are not freed from jail. The activists called it a fake. The purported letter, published by Kommunist, the Armenian Communist Party daily newspaper, demands the immediate release of members of the Karabakh Committee, a group that has led an 11-month campaign for the annexation of Nagorno-Karabakh, a predominantly Armenian region of Azerbaijan. If the committee's leaders are not freed, the unsigned document says, ``we will have recourse to mass terror. ... In our arsenals, we have `Stingers,' provided by our friends.'' A facsimile copy of the purported document was published in Kommunist's Dec. 28 editions, which reached Moscow over the weekend. Kommunist said the letter was received by law-enforcement officials, and labeled ``to be transmitted to the KGB.'' It made no additional reference to the Stingers. Many of the U.S.-manufactured ground-to-air missiles have been shipped by the United States to Afghan insurgents fighting their country's pro-Moscow government. Rafael Popoyan, an Armenian activist, said the letter printed by Kommunist was a ``total fabrication from beginning to end,'' and another attempt by officials to discredit the Karabakh committee militants. Sergei Grigoryants, an Armenian-Russian activist who was released last week after 30 days in jail in Yerevan, the Armenian capital, for filming soldiers who are enforcing a curfew, said the grammatical construction of the letter was too complicated for most Armenians. The letter was written in Russian, which Armenians learn in school in addition to their own language and alphabet. At a news conference in Moscow, Grigoryants also distributed a copy of an interview with Ashot Manucharyan, a member of the Armenian Supreme Soviet legislature who Grigoryants said is a fugitive because of his nationalist activities. Manucharyan was quoted as saying he was told about such threatening letters by the Armenian KGB secret police five months ago, when no members of the Karabakh Committee were under detention. Popoyan said the appearance of the article may herald a further crackdown by Soviet authorities on the committee, seven of whose members are now in jail and the other four reportedly in hiding to avoid arrest. ``Now that so many members of the committee have been arrested, there is no one to answer these ridiculous charges,'' Popoyan said, speaking by telephone from Yerevan. ``The press is now closed to anyone from the committee.'' Soviet authorities jailed committee leaders after the Dec. 7 earthquake in northwestern Armenia. Authorities have accused committee members of sabotaging the earthquake relief effort and whipping up ethnic tensions by continuing to seek Nagorno-Karabakh's annexation by Armenia, a demand the Kremlin has refused. 
A man serving a 25-year to life sentence for the 1978 slaying of a restaurateur who took his cover-girl lover away from him has been granted permission to seek a new trial. Howard ``Buddy'' Jacobson, who says he's being treated for bone cancer in Attica state prison, was granted permission to file new motions on Feb. 1 by Appellate Division Judge Richard W. Wallach, Newsday reported Monday. The ruling was made Dec. 8, the newspaper said. Three previous appeals of Jacobson's conviction of murdering Jack Tupper have been denied. Jacobson, 58, one of the nation's most successful thoroughbred horse trainers in the 1960s and 1970s, maintains that Tupper was a narcotics dealer slain in a drug dispute. ``I'm innocent, plain and simple,'' Jacobson told Newsday from Attica. The government, with model Melanie Cain a major witness in an 11-week trial in 1980, said Jacobson shot and stabbed Tupper to death because Miss Cain left him after four years and moved into an apartment across the hall with Tupper. Jacobson's lawyer, Herald Price Fahringer, said a new trial will be sought on grounds that the prosecution hid statements by a witness who said Jacobson was not one of the three men she saw at the site where Tupper's body was dumped. Miss Cain, 33, now an actress with a 3-year-old daughter, told Newsday she still believed Jacobson guilty and would ``be shocked if it turned out differently.'' 
Pilots on Monday made their first test of a new Soviet airliner, the Tupolev 204, that designers say is more roomy and efficient than current Aeroflot jets, the Tass news agency said. The 214-seat airliner is to go into service at the end of 1990 and be one of Aeroflot's principal medium-range carrier in the 1990s, Tass said. The evening TV news program ``Vremya'' showed a yellow twin-engine jet on a tarmac in Moscow preparing for its 32-minute flight. News reports did not say if any problems were found in the flight. The Tu-204 ``belongs to a new generation of airliners, economical, equipped with most up-to-date electronic systems and instruments of Soviet make, and very comfortable for passengers,'' Tass said. Chief engineer of the new plane, L. Lanovsky, told Tass it will have wider corridors and more leg room than the Soviet Union's notoriously cramped airliners. The plane will be built in modules, so first-class and business-class sections also can be built in, he said. Some Aeroflot planes that fly international routes have business-class sections, but there is no such differentiation on domestic flights. It will be much more energy efficient than the Tupolev 154, currently the most efficient Soviet passenger jet, Tass said. Tass said test pilots and engineers will test up to 3,000 components of the plane in the next 12 to 18 months, and that it probably will be displayed at international air shows before it goes into general service. The Tu-204 is likely to replace the Tu-154 on some routes. It has been carrying passengers on regular routes since 1972. 
President Ramaswamy Venkataraman on Monday rejected an appeal for clemency for one of the two Sikhs condemned to death for the 1984 assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, defense lawyers said. Lawyers for Kehar Singh and Satwant Singh said they would file another round of appeals Tuesday to halt their executions. Ram Jethmalani, the defense attorney for Kehar Singh, said the earliest his client could be hanged was at dawn Wednesday, but said he would launch appeals in the trial court, appellate court and Supreme Court on Tuesday. Under Indian law, a man condemned to be executed has to be hanged within seven days of the issue of the death warrants but not before 24 hours from the time it is issued. S. Mohapatra, superintendent of the maximum-security Tihar jail, where the convicted men are lodged, said Monday he had received the ``black warrants'' for the executions, but refused to say when they would take place. Rupinder S. Sodhi, defense attorney for Satwant Singh, said Venkataraman sent a letter Monday to Kehar Singh's son, Rajinder, informing him of the decision to turn down the plea for mercy. It was the second time he has turned down a mercy petition by Kehar Singh, 54. ``After carefully considering the petition ... the president of India has declined to grant pardon or any other relief ... and has rejected the petition,'' the letter said. It gave no reason for the rejection, which vacated the stays of execution for Kehar Singh and Satwant Singh. The two men are not related. All male Sikhs take the name of Singh, which means lion in the Punjabi language, by doctrine of their faith. Satwant Singh has not filed a mercy petition with the president, but under Indian law his death sentence was automatically delayed when Kehar Singh asked for clemency. Sodhi said Satwant Singh would not ask the president for clemency. Mrs. Gandhi was shot in the garden of her New Delhi residence on Oct. 31, 1984, by two of her Sikh bodyguards. One of them, Beant Singh, was killed in a shootout with other bodyguards minutes later. The other, Satwant Singh, was arrested, tried and sentenced to the gallows. Kehar Singh, an uncle of Beant Singh, was convicted of conspiracy and sentenced to death. Mrs. Gandhi's assassination was in apparent revenge for an army raid she had ordered four months earlier on the Golden Temple, Sikhism's holiest shrine, to clear the complex of Sikh militants entrenched inside. On Oct. 30, Kehar Singh filed his first mercy petition. It was dismissed by the president Nov. 24 and the two men were ordered to hang on Dec. 2. But Kehar Singh's lawyers challenged the president's decision in the Supreme Court, arguing Venkataraman had powers to review the case. The court granted a stay 15 hours before the two were to be hanged. On Dec. 16, the Supreme Court ordered the president to reconsider the appeal. A trial court convicted them in 1986 and sentenced them to death. The convictions and death sentences were upheld by an appeals court later that year and by the Supreme Court last August. Sikhs, who make up 2 percent of India's 880 million people, claim they are discriminated by the Hindus, the country's religious majority accounting for over 80 percent of the population. Militant Sikhs are fighting a 6-year-old guerrilla war for a separate nation in Punjab. Over 2,400 deaths last year were blamed on the militants. 
A 24-hour strike by Iberia airlines' mechanics forced the cancellation of 55 flights Monday, a spokesman said. The cancellations mostly affected flights to and from Madrid and Barcelona on the domestic carrier Aviaco, said Jose Maria Estrade, an Iberia spokesman. The 1,400-member Spanish Association of Aircraft Maintenance Technicians called the strike to pressure Iberia to accept a separate pay scale and work rules for union members. The mechanics are included in an agreement governing all 21,000 Iberia ground employees. Estrade said 400 mechanics went to work Monday as part of an agreement with the union to provide minimum services. But he said Iberia officials considered the strike illegal and were considering disciplinary action against its organizers. The union has announced more strikes for Thursday and Jan. 9. 
She was one of 12 teen-agers left with severe burns after the church bus crash that killed 27 people last year, but Trina Muller is learning to adjust. Friends, counselors and even strangers are helping. ``One day this kid looked at me and said, `What happened to your hands and face?' and my friends ran up to him and said, `If you don't like what you see, don't look,''' Trina said. Garry King, principal at J.T. Alton Middle School, said survivors of the May 14 crash deserve the credit for a smooth transition in returning to school. ``These kids are fantastically courageous,'' King said. ``It's been an inspiration for me.'' Trina must wear skin-tight pressure garments that doctors say will help prevent her burns from leaving hideous scars. She thinks the flesh-colored suit that covers her from her head to her knees is ugly. ``If the doctor told me I didn't have to wear it anymore, I'd throw a party,'' she said. Still, the 14-year-old doesn't let the chin strap prevent her from endless phone conversations with friends or the pressure gloves from wearing several rings over them. Life goes on for Trina and the 39 others who nearly burned to death inside the church bus after it was hit head-on by a pickup truck driver. Police say Larry Mahoney's truck crashed into the bus from the First Assembly of God Church in Radcliff while he was driving the wrong way on Interstate 71. The bus, returning to Radcliff after the church group spent the day at an amusement park north of Cincinnati, burst into flames. The 67 people aboard survived the impact, but three adults and 24 children died as they tried to escape the burning bus. Mahoney, 35, of Worthville, pleaded innocent to 27 counts of murder and other charges, including drunken driving. He was released from jail on $540,000 bond Oct. 10. Aside from periodic absences for surgery, the student survivors are all back in school. Doctors and therapists monitor their healing to see what they can do to limit disfigurement for the seven who had skin grafts. The Hardin County school system has worked to smooth the way for the students by inviting a burn specialist to lead a seminar for school staff in August. Sharon Rengers, a nurse at Kosair Children's Hospital in Louisville, gave a similar presentation to students at Alton Middle School in September. She said many teen-agerss associate burn patients with Freddy Krueger, the disfigured character in the ``Nightmare on Elm Street'' horror movies. ``I have to tell them, `Burn patients are not monsters. They're the same people; they just look different.''' But she said it's natural for patients to worry about their looks. ``Physical appearance is a big part of our culture. It's even more important for teens.'' The battle now, therapists say, is to get the patients to wear the pressure garments. Trina said her friends yell at her when she tries to take them off. But other students have resisted the treatment because the garments are noticeable and often uncomfortable. Dotty Pearman said her daughter, Christy, a freshman at North Hardin High School, has come home in tears on several occasions after people commented about her appearance or voice, which is deeper because her vocal chords burned, grew together and had to be surgically separated. Christy also has second- and third-degree burns on her arm and shoulders. Said Christy: ``The memory will always be there. And then you look down and see the scar to remind you.'' 
President Reagan said today the United States has heard nothing from Yasser Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, on help in tracking down those responsible for last month's bombing of a Pan American jetliner over Scotland. ``We've not heard from him,'' Reagan told reporters upon landing here after spending the New Year's weekend in Palms Springs. ``If he has anything to tell us, I'm sure he'll tell us.'' FBI Director William Sessions had said on Sunday that Arafat has ``a wealth of information'' that could help in the investigation of the Dec. 21 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 that killed 270 people. Without the PLO's help, Sessions said on two television interview shows, the govenment expects a lengthy manhunt but is optimistic that those responsible will be found eventually. ``We're set up for the long haul,'' he said. ``We have a pattern and reputation for being able to solve'' such crimes. The FBI chief said he would welcome any help Arafat and his Palestine Liberation Organization might provide. He said contacts between the FBI and Arafat presumably could be set up by the State Department. U.S. and PLO officials recently opened talks on the Arab-Israeli conflict after Arafat disavowed terrorism and recognized Israel's right to exist. Sessions said Arafat ``has a great deal of information, a wealth of information he can give us.'' Last week the Kuwaiti newspaper Al-Seyasseh quoted an unidentified PLO official as saying the organization was considering a request by U.S. officials that the PLO help in tracking down those responsible for the bombing. While welcoming Arafat's help in identifying possible suspects in the Pan Am crash, Sessions said he opposes any attempt by the PLO leader to retaliate by killing any suspects. Arafat has blamed terrorists for bringing down the jetliner, condemning it as an ``inhuman criminal action.'' Asked about reports that Arafat is consider organizing an assassination team to retailiate against those who planted the bomb, Sessions said, ``We believe in the system of justice. We hope those people are handled in the courts.'' Sessions said he has no evidence as yet to confirm the bombing was the work of terrorists rather than a non-political criminal act aimed at an individual on board the jet. He also said that 62 bodies from the crash have been identified through fingerprinting. Meawhile, Alan McArtor, head of the Federal Aviation Adminstration, also appeared on ``Meet the Press,'' and defended the policy of not publicizing threats to airliners. ``These threats are transmitted on a routine basis,'' he said. But McArtor conceded that it was mistake for the United States to warn overseas embassy personnel about the threat to Pan Am jets while not alerting the public. ``Personally, I don't think it was managed well,'' he said. McArtor said an alert has been issued to the Athens airport and others in the Mediterranean area to be on the lookout for false passports. ``There has been movement of some known terrorists who have in their possession false passports,'' McArtor said. He also said the FAA will negotiate with European allies to seek improved airline security. ``This is a threat against civil aviation. It's not just isolated to American carriers,'' he said. On CBS' ``Face the Nation,'' Sen. William Cohen, R-Maine, and Rep. Lee Hamilton, D-Ind., said the United States should keep open the possibility of military retaliation against any nation linked to terrorist attacks. ``The military option always has to be there,'' Hamilton said. ``But we don't want to indiscriminately bomb areas.'' In London, British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher distanced herself from U.S. talk of punishing whoever planted the bomb. ``I don't think an eye for an eye and tooth for a tooth is ever valid,'' she said. ``The most important thing to do is to try to get the cooperation of all nations to track these people down so that they are brought to justice,'' she said in a British television interview. 
A woman celebrating her birthday with her husband broke into hysteria after returning home to find that a fire had destroyed their wooden house, killing 10 people, including their four children. Firefighters had to restrain Nancy Watson when she repeatedly tried to enter the burned-out two-story house, said Valerie Pound, a witness. ``There was no house to get back into. It was just gone,'' Pound said. ``She kept screaming the names of her four kids in a pattern, one right after another.'' Three walls and the roof already had collapsed when firefighters arrived early Sunday, said Fire Chief Leo Renn. The bodies of the badly burned victims were in or near their beds. ``It's probably the worst situation I've seen where 10 people are killed at one time,'' said Cass County Sheriff Jim Dawson. ``It's just devastating.'' Killed were John and Nancy Watson's children, Jenny, 14, Samantha, 11, Edward, 9, and William, 8; Mrs. Watson's sister and brother-in-law, Jean and Becky Smischney; their two children, Jay, 10, and Kimberly, 8; and Michelle Bastle, 10, and Robin Bastle, 12, daughters of Tony and Nancy Bastle, who live near the Watsons. Elsewhere, New Year's weekend fires killed at least 23 people, including four in Charlotte, N.C., and four in Anchorage, Alaska, since Saturday. Mrs. Watson was kept overnight for observation at Itasca Memorial Hospital early today in the north-central Minnesota city of Grand Rapids, 20 miles northeast of this town of 400 residents. She was expected to be released today, hospital officials said. The fire spread so quickly it was unlikely anyone woke up before being overcome by smoke, said Renn. It was sparked by a wood-burning stove or an oil space heater, Renn said. He originally said the house was not equipped with smoke detectors, which were not required by law. But later, after a relative said there were indeed three smoke detectors in the house, Renn said, ``We may have to retract that.'' The fire was discovered by passing motorists, who stopped at the house of Melody Berczyk across the road from the Watson home. ``It was one big ball of flame right then,'' said Berczyk, who called the fire department. A crisis intervention team was asked to come to the elementary school Tuesday to help the children deal with the deaths of their classmates. ``Hopefully, we'll just all pull together,'' said Principal Mike Doro. The Watsons had left the children with her sister and brother-in-law, who were visiting from Bemidji, to celebrate Mrs. Watson's 32nd birthday on New Year's Eve. Tammy Grover, a stepsister of John Watson, said the Watson children loved the outdoors. ``They had pet rabbits and geese and ducks,'' she said. ``Jenny liked drawing and painting a lot, especially unicorns and horses. She just won $75 in a contest at school, which was a really big thing to her,'' Grover said. The Watsons, who are unemployed, ``were a poor family as far as material things go, but they were a very close family,'' said Pound. She said a fund has been set up for the victims' families at the Security State Bank in Remer. ``In a small town, everyone is family,'' she said. ``This is by far the most devastating thing that has ever happened to this town. ``Everybody will pull together and help in any way you can. Even though it's not going to bring the kids back, the families will know that everyone in this town is hurt by what happened and is behind them. This has touched everybody,'' Pound said. In other fires, Anchorage police said two adults and two children were killed in a trailer fire Sunday. Seven people died in fires in Anchorage during all of 1988, authorities said. Four members of a Charlotte family died and three others were injured in a New Year's Day fire blamed on smoldering smoking materials in their cinder-block house, fire officials said. Killed were a woman, 26, her 18-month-old son, her sister, 11, and the sisters' 65-year-old great-uncle. Two of the injured were in in critical condition, authorities said. Two boys, ages 4 months and 2 years, were killed and a 5-year-old boy was critically injured in a fire at a Philadelphia public housing project this morning, authorities said. The cause was under investigation. A father and son died in a house fire Sunday in Marion, Ohio. The father carried his wife through their burning home to safety before re-entering the house, where he died in an unsuccessful effort to save his 20-year-old son, authorities said. In Wisconsin, New Year's Day fires killed one person in a Waukesha hotel room and one in a Racine residence. In New York state, a couple was found dead in a bedroom closet following an early Sunday fire that destroyed their home in Willsboro along Lake Champlain; and a 7-year-old girl died and her 3-year-old brother was critically injured Sunday evening when a fire engulfed their two-story home in Ogdensburg. In Portland, Maine, a mother and her infant daughter were killed in a house with a defective smoke detector on New Year's Eve, officials said. An 11-year-old boy was arrested and charged with murder in an apartment fire that killed a 53-year-old man in the southern Maine city of Biddeford on Saturday night, officials said. In Wichita, Kan., a house fire early Saturday killed a firefighter and a woman and left her husband in serious condition, authorities said. A 20-year-old Kansas City, Mo., man died in a fire in his house Sunday. 
Searchers on Monday recovered part of the tail section of Pan Am Flight 103, and civic officials said they would meet to discuss plans for rebuilding parts of Lockerbie destroyed by the crash. Police Superintendent Angus Kennedy said part of the Boeing 747's tail section was found near Lengholm, about 15 miles east of Lockerbie, along with ``sizable pieces'' of nearby wreckage that has not been identified. ``The area is very rough terrain and there has been no confirmation yet from the accident investigators about what parts of the aircraft are there (other than the tail part),'' he said. Only 20 percent of the jumbo jet had been recovered from the crash site, although other parts of the plane have been seen, he said. All 259 passengers and crew members on the New York-bound jet died in the Dec. 21 crash. Authorities have recovered three bodies of 11 townspeople presumed killed on the ground. Ten houses were destroyed by falling wreckage, replaced by a crater 100 feet long and 30 feet deep. Another 30 homes were badly damaged. Les Jardine, spokesman for Dumfries and Galloway regional council, said council officials would meet with residents to discuss rebuilding plans. Thirteen bodies were identified Monday, including that of passenger Ingrid Smith, Kennedy said. Ms. Smith's husband, Capt. Bruce Smith, a Pan Am pilot, accused local police over the weekend of being ``paralyzed by inexperience and incompetence'' and of delaying the return of victims' bodies to their relatives. Chief Constable John Boyd of the Dumfries and Galloway police force said he sympathized with bereaved relatives, but added everything was being done to positively identify the victims. He said 81 of the 242 recovered bodies have been released. No bodies were recovered Monday. ``Every effort continues to be made to identify and release victims' bodies to their families,'' he said. ``The trauma and grief experienced by relatives continues to be uppermost in our minds.'' In a related development, passengers on Scandinavian Airlines System faced delays Monday as the airline issued a worldwide security alert after receiving a bombing threat, officials said. The warning was received early Sunday from Hungarian police through Interpol in Paris, said SAS spokesman John Herbert. A security alert was transmitted to about 90 international airports used by SAS aircraft, Herbert said. Budapest radio reported that an unknown caller telephoned police headquarters in the Hungarian capital, warning that an SAS airliner would be blown up. The report did not elaborate. Security at Athens airport also was tightened. A police spokesman said security had been increased around Pan Am, TWA and several Arab airline terminals and baggage check-in counters. The Flight 103 investigation is focused on the Lockerbie crash site, Frankfurt Airport and London's Heathrow Airport. The flight originated as a Boeing 727 in Frankfurt and, following a stop in Heathrow, left for New York on the jumbo jet. In Frankfurt, a prosecutor's spokesman said Monday the Pan Am jet had been carrying four U.S. military mail sacks and a bank document pouch that were not checked by Frankfurt airport security officials. The Munich-based weekly magazine Bunte quoted an unidentified security expert as saying the bomb could have been smuggled in with the mail. Spokesman Hubert Harth at the federal prosecutor's office in Frankfurt said the post bags and bank pouch were not checked by airport security ``because they had been continuously under the control of U.S. military officials.'' FBI Director William Sessions said Sunday he welcomed any information Palestine Liberation Organization Chairman Yasser Arafat could provide in identifying suspects. The Sunday Express, a London daily, reported without attribution that Arafat had vowed to dispatch an assassination squad to hunt down and kill the bomber. Arafat ``has a great deal of information, a wealth of information he can give us,'' Sessions said in an interview. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher distanced herself Sunday from U.S. vows to punish the culprits. ``I don't think an eye for an eye and tooth for a tooth is ever valid,'' Ms. Thatcher said on the ``David Frost on Sunday'' program. ``The most important thing to do is to try to get the cooperation of all nations to track these people down so that they are brought to justice.'' 
A revamped Christian Science Monitor makes its debut Tuesday, with color photography, fewer pages and less advertising all aimed at streamlining the newspaper Mary Baker Eddy founded 80 years ago. The changes prompted an exodus in November of top management at the church-run daily newspaper, including the departure of Pulitzer Prize-winning editor Katherine Fanning. But company executives said Monday that five years of research showed the newspaper's readers, faced with other demands on their time, wanted more concise articles and ``greater selectivity'' of coverage. ``In short, they continue to look to the Monitor for the context and perspective of events, and want a serious paper that can be read thoroughly in about 30 minutes,'' John H. Hoagland Jr., manager of the Christian Science Publishing Society said Monday in a statement. The society publishes the Monitor. The newspaper, published Monday through Friday with a circulation of about 170,000, is still a tabloid. But it will now be 20 pages, smaller by about eight pages in its new format which limits national advertising to two pages and eliminates local and classified ads. In addition, the staff of 160 people are among the 800 members of the publishing society and broadcasting operation due for cutbacks of 20 percent to 25 percent, said Don Feldheim, spokesman for publishing society. Supporting the newspaper reportedly has cost the church $20 million a year. Mrs. Fanning, who became the first woman editor of the Monitor in 1983, resigned along with her managing editor and assistant managing editor in November. She said she left rather than see the newspaper reduced in size, while also losing independence under a restructured management that concentrated more on the church's broadcasting arm. 
Leaders of Wisconsin's smallest Chippewa band have recommended that tribal members approve the state's proposed $10 million settlement to limit the band's hunting and fishing treaty rights. The Chippewa's exercise of treaty rights has been a source of controversy and protest by sportsfishermen and other outdoorsmen who argue it is unfair for Indians to use methods or seasons prohibited others and that the exercise of the court-upheld food-gathering rights may harm or deplete natural resources. Earl A. Charlton, an attorney representing the Sokaogon Chippewa, said the Tribal Council unanimously adopted the final draft of an agreement with the State Justice Department and recommended it for approval by the community. A meeting is scheduled Tuesday night to introduce the settlement, and a Jan. 14 referendum has been set, said council member Charles Ackley. If the agreement is ratified, it must be approved by the Legislature and signed by Gov. Tommy G. Thompson by Feb. 15, Charlton said. He said the agreement calls for payments of $1 million each year for 10 years and that 75 percent of the money is to go toward economic development and the rest is to pay for health and social programs. The Sokaogon band would have to give up some rights, including spearfishing outside of that for ceremonial purposes. The band would be limited to 100 fish speared per year, he said. The band also would forfeit its right to harvest timber on public land except for firewood, he said. The agreement could be extended for an additional 15 years at the option of both parties. Assistant Attorney General Stephen Nicks, who drafted the agreement, refused to say over the weekend whether offers similar to that prepared for the Sokaogon band have been drawn up for five other Chippewa bands in northern Wisconsin. State and tribal lawyers have negotiated for months in an attempt to reach an agreement over the Chippewa's off-reservation claims to natural resources guaranteed by 19th-century federal treaties. The tribe's insistence on using spears to catch game fish, a technique ordinarily forbidden by the state Department of Natural Resources, has been a volatile subject between tribal traditionalists and treaty critics. Justice Department spokesman Frank Ryan said he could not comment whether similar deals were under consideration by other bands. The Sokaogon is believed to be the smallest Chippewa band in Wisconsin, with about 1,300 members at Mole Lake, Charlton said. 
Ranasinghe Premadasa was sworn in as president Monday in a Buddhist ceremony at the Temple of the Tooth, and he again appealed for an end to the ethnic violence that has devastated the tropical island. ``Further delay in finding a solution will enable certain elements to destroy many more innocent lives. This destruction must end because democracy cannot tolerate it,'' Premadasa said in his inaugural address. Premadasa, 64, took the oaths of office and secrecy before Chief Justice Parinda Ranaginshe during a two-hour ceremony in this picturesque hill town, 85 miles east of Colombo, the capital. Heavily armed soldiers surrounded the sacred Temple of the Tooth, where more than 500,000 people gathered to watch the ceremony. Police sharpshooters were perched on surrounding roofs, and troop on the ground checked all those entering the city. Premadasa won a six-year term by defeating two opponents in the Dec. 19 presidential election. He polled 50.4 percent of the vote, although only 55 percent of the 9.3 million eligible voters cast ballots. He succeeds his mentor, Junius R. Jayewaredene, as president after serving as his prime minister for 11 years. The president wields supreme power in Sri Lanka. Premadasa assumes the task of ruling a nation reeling from five years of strife between the predominantly Buddhist Sinhalese and the Hindu Tamils. Nearly 10,000 people have died since 1983 when Tamil militants began fighting for independence from the majority Sinhalese. The fighting also has left the national economy in shambles, ruining the island's crucial tourism industry and reducing agricultural production. Premadasa also faces an uneasy relationship with regional superpower India, which sent an estimated 47,000 peacekeeping troops to Sri Lanka 18 months ago to disarm the rebels and enforce a cease-fire. The insurgency has yet to be quelled, however, and Premadasa said he wants the unpopular Indian soldiers to leave. On Sunday, the Indian government announced it would start withdrawing its troops this week at Premadasa's request. Between 2,000 and 3,000 soldiers are expected to leave within days. The remaining troops will be gradually pulled out, the government said, but gave no timetable. Speaking from the octagonal central courtyard of the ancient Buddhist shrine, Premadasa in his inaugural speech vowed he would not allow ``a single inch'' of Sri Lankan soil to be occupied by any foreign country again. ``Let us settle our problems by ourselves through negotiations and mutual respect. We should not create situations that provoke or invite foreign intervention,'' he said. Unlike most of Sri Lanka's ruling elite, Premadasa was born in the slums of Colombo. During his campaign, he frequently said he was the only candidate who could champion the poor in this country where the per capital annual income of $360. Premadasa joined the United National Party in 1956 and entered Parliament four years later. When the party returned to power in 1977, he became Jayewardene's prime minister. He remained at that post throughout Jayewardene's term, although the two men had some policy differences, most prominently over the Indian-sponsored accord aimed at ending the Tamil rebellion. The pact, signed on July 29, 1987, offered limited autonomy to Tamil community in the north and east provinces and invited India to send peacekeeping soldiers to combat the rebels who still demand independence. Jayewardene signed the accord. Premadasa opposes it. Tamils comprise 18 percent of the island's 16 million people. They claim they are denied jobs and education by the Sinhalese, who make up 75 percent of the population and control the government. The biggest and most militant Tamil rebel group, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, rejected the accord, saying it did not meet enought of their demands for self-rule. A radical Sinhalese group, the People's Liberation Front, also denounced the pact, claiming it granted too many concessions to the Tamil community. The Front has been blamed for more than 900 murders since the accord was signed. Most victims have been government supporters. During the campaign, Premadasa took pains not to blame Sinhalese extremists for escalating violence. He has yet to say how he will deal with the radicals, but pledged to provide security to any member of extremists groups. ``I call upon those who have not joined the democratic process to do so,'' he said. ``I am available at any time, anywhere to discuss any problem.'' 
Afghanistan reported scores of people killed and dozens wounded Monday, the second day of a New Year's cease-fire proclaimed by the Soviet-backed regime but rejected by the Moslem guerrillas. Two insurgent leaders criticized the Soviet Union for considering a role in a future Afghan government for former King Zahir Shah, who was overthrown in 1973 and lives in Italy. Iran said Yuri Vorontsov, the Soviet deputy foreign minister, arrived in Tehran for talks with Afghan insurgent leaders based in Iran. He met in Saudi Arabia last month with Burhanuddin Rabbani, leader of a seven-faction alliance based in Pakistan. At least 5.5 million Afghans have fled their country during a decade of civil war, nearly all of them to Pakistan or Iran, Moslem nations that are Afghanistan's neighbors on the east and west. Moslem insurgents began fighting after a communist coup in April 1978 and Soviet military forces entered Afghanistan in December 1979. An estimated 115,000 were there when a U.N.-mediated withdrawal agreement was signed April 14, 1988. Red Army soldiers started leaving May 15 and U.N. officials said half were gone by Aug. 15. All are to be out by Feb. 15. The insurgents, supported by the United States and Pakistan, have demanded an Islamic government after the Soviets leave and are trying to overthrow the regime of President Najib. Najib announced the cease-fire Friday, effective New Year's Day, and said government forces would not fire unless fired upon. Insurgent leaders believe Najib's government will fall when the Soviets are gone and rejected the truce because, they said, it would be a disadvantage to them at this stage. State radio in Kabul, capital of Afghanistan, said Monday that insurgents attacked Kandahar in the southeast, killing three civilians and wounding six. It said 31 guerrillas were killed and 27 wounded in an ensuing battle with security forces. Kabul radio, monitored in Islamabad, said the guerrillas fired on residential areas of Paktia, near the Pakistani border, and security forces returned the fire, killing 17 insurgents. Two more battles, in which 23 guerrillas were slain, occurred at Jalalabad and Gushta in Nangarahar province, the radio claimed. It did not mention government casualties and there was no independent confirmation of its reports. In Islamabad, insurgent leaders Rabbani and Gulbadin Hekmatyar criticized the Soviets for overtures to the former king. Vorontsov, who also is Moscow's ambassador to Kabul, met with Zahir Shah in Rome on Dec. 24. ``Zahir Shah will certainly not feel safe in the revolutionary Afghanistan,'' Rabbani said at a news conference, and Hekmatyar declared the king ``has no place in today's Afghanistan.'' ``The Afghan people will strongly resist any move against formation of an Islamic government in Kabul,'' Hekmatyar said. 
Students chanted pro-democracy slogans Monday as they marched in a funeral cortege with 100,000 other mourners to bury the widow of Burmese independence leader Aung San. The students defied a ban on public gatherings to accompany the body of Daw Khin Kyi along the five-mile route from her home to the burial site on the southern end of Rangoon's Shwedagon Pagoda. It was the first student march since a military crackdown in September. No soldiers were seen near the crowds, although some armed personnel stood a distance away. A few police officers kept order. Daw Khin Kyi, 77, died Dec. 27 after a long illness. She was the widow of Gen. Aung San, who was assassinated in 1947. She also was the mother of Aung San Suu Kyi, general secretary of the major opposition party, the National League For Democracy. Aung San Suu Kyi, who returned to Rangoon from her home in England to care for her ailing mother, played a key role in the recent demonstrations against authoritarian rule in Burma. The student-led demonstrations ended when soldiers killed hundreds of protesters and military commander Gen. Saw Maung seized power in a coup Sept. 18, and authorities banned politically motivated public gatherings. The students defied the ban during the 2{-hour funeral procession. ``We won't forget our colleagues who have fallen in the fight for democracy!'' they sang. ``We will continue our struggle!'' Students carried placards with other anti-government slogans. Marchers also carried banners and flags of the National League for Democracy, the All Burma Students Federation and the Rangoon University Students Union. Many people paid their respects to Daw Khin Kyi during the week at her home. On Sunday, Saw Maung signed a condolence book at the house and spoke to Aung San Suu Kyi and her brother, Aung San Oo. Aung San Oo arrived from the United States, where he has been living as an American citizen. Burmese law does not permit Burmese with foreign citizenship to return to the country, even as tourists, but Saw Maung made an exception for Aung San Oo to attend the funeral. Aung San Suu Kyi has remained a Burmese citizen. The government donated about $1,670 for funeral expenses and allowed the construction of a special tomb for Daw Khin Kyi near the tombs of the last queen of Burma and of former U.N. Secretary-General U Thant. Four government ministers attended the funeral and Ne Win, whose 26-year rule of Burma ended with his resignation last year, sent a wreath. 
PTL founders Jim and Tammy Faye Bakker returned to the television pulpit Monday for the first time in two years with an appeal for ``hurting people'' to keep the faith, but no direct pleas for donations. ``If Jim and Tammy can survive their holocaust of the last two years, then you can make it,'' said Bakker, who left PTL in March 1987 amid a sex-and-money scandal. ``The Jim and Tammy Show'' originated in the living room of the Bakkers' borrowed home in this Charlotte suburb. They said it was sent by satellite to a half-dozen stations in California, Ohio, New York, Pennsylvania and Louisiana, with the couple's new ministry paying for air time. The hourlong telecast is scheduled Mondays through Fridays. ``We bought time,'' said Mrs. Bakker. ``We had a certain amount of money and that's all the time we could buy, and it's not a lot of money, but it got us back on the air and we are so grateful.'' In their prime at PTL, the Bakkers and their ``PTL Club'' could be seen on about 180 television stations. As in their old show, the Bakkers sat on a couch. Mrs. Bakker wore her trademark heavy eye makeup and broke into tears several times, the first just two minutes into their show. The couple made no direct appeal for funds, but gave an address and telephone number so viewers could request prayers. And the show's guest, former PTL songwriter Mike Murdock, gave Mrs. Bakker a card which he said he had been asked to deliver by a supporter. Mrs. Bakker said the card contained a $1,000 check. John Bland, a volunteer at Jim and Tammy Ministries, said Monday's show drew ``a beautiful response.'' ``A lot of people called in who said they were partners (supporters who gave $1,000 or more to PTL) and glad to see that they were back on TV,'' Bland said. The Bakkers' last appearance as television evangelists was in January 1987, two months before the scandal that drove them from PTL. They had left the air because Mrs. Bakker was receiving treatment for dependency on prescription drugs and for pneumonia, the couple said at the time. ``Jim, I think this is probably the happiest day of my life,'' Mrs. Bakker said as the show began. Bakker told viewers that his last television appearance was to break ground for the Crystal Palace Church at Heritage USA, the home of PTL. ``I believe that was the last straw for Satan,'' Bakker said. ``I think the devil was mad that something so beautiful was being built. ... I believe the devil said, `I have to smash Jim and Tammy Bakker.''' Bakker resigned from PTL following disclosure of his 1980 sexual encounter with a church secretary, Jessica Hahn, and that she had been paid for her silence. In June 1987, the ministry sought protection from creditors in bankruptcy court, and last month a judge approved the sale of PTL's chief asset, the Heritage USA theme park at Fort Mill, S.C. Also last month, Bakker and a top aide were indicted on charges they used PTL funds for private gain. But the only mention of his legal troubles during the show came when Murdock noted a song he said he wrote in a lawyer's office. Murdock said he knew Bakker ``didn't know anything about lawyers.'' ``Oh no-o-o-o,'' Bakker said with a pained chuckle. Fred Wuenschel, general manager WOCD in Amsterdam, N.Y., one of the stations broadcasting the program, said he would show it ``as long as they keep paying.'' He said the station has a 30-day contract for the show, but declined to say how much the Bakkers are paying except to say it was ``the usual rate per hour.'' 
For just $300, police have added 40 recruits to patrol the streets of this northern Kentucky city. They don't make arrests, but they will drive people to jail _ for a fee. The recruits are the drivers of De-Luxe Yellow Cabs Inc., who have enlisted in a 2-week-old program to give police more eyes and ears in the streets. ``This is an excellent opportunity for us to take advantage of the fact that cab drivers operate 24 hours a day, seven days a week on the same streets that we patrol,'' said Sgt. Bill Dorsey, a police administrative supervisor. Under the new program, Taxis On Patrol, cab drivers report suspicious activity to dispatchers over two-way radios. The dispatchers then notify police. ``You name it and we see it,'' said cab driver Bob Sterling. ``We stop fights, rapes and all of those things.'' Still, authorities say they don't want cab drivers to stop crimes, just to tell police about them. ``We're not asking them to do police work or to get involved,'' said city Commissioner Butch Callery. ``They're strictly to call an event in and alert us to the situation.'' Callery proposed the taxi program after reading about similar efforts elsewhere. ``It'll never take the place of more policemen, but it will assist us,'' the commissioner said. The $300 start-up cost of the program covered a 2{-hour training program for drivers and the printing of decals affixed to the taxis. Authorities in Nashville, Tenn., tried a similar system in 1983, but gave up after cab drivers lost interest, said Walter Lawhorn, an inspector for the Nashville-Davidson County Metropolitan Taxicab Board. Assistant City Manager Gregory Jarvis said the Covington program hasn't been in effect long enough to determine its impact. But, he said, ``It certainly can't hurt.'' 
Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev slowly may be winning converts to his policy of glasnost, or openness, but whether the word merits inclusion in a U.S. dictionary remains under debate. The honor likely to be accorded such all-American terms as ``televangelist'' and ``computer virus'' in upcoming Merriam-Webster dictionaries has so far been denied the word describing Gorbachev's reforms. ``It is still most often found in either italics or quotes and to us that means it has not been completely Americanized,'' said James G. Lowe, senior editor at Springfield-based G.C. Merriam Inc. ``When reporters and writers start using it without explaining what it means it will be ready for consideration for the dictionary.'' The term ``computer virus'' came into wide use too late for this year's book, but it is an almost sure bet for inclusion in the next addendum to the company's unabridged dictionary, Lowe said, thanks to a graduate student who this autumn unleashed a ``virus'' that clogged university and military computers and exposed the vulnerability of computer banks to infection. ``Televangelist,'' ``colorization,'' as used to describe the tinting of old black-and-white films, and ``zap,'' when used to describe what happens to a television commercial when a viewer switches to another channel by remote control, are also likely candidates for the unabridged dictionary, he said. 
Monday was a holiday within a holiday for many parents who had the day off but sent their children back to school. The federal and state New Year's Day holiday was observed by many school systems, but it was back to the books for students in public schools here. ``I don't want to go,'' said Joe Alexander, 14, as he boarded a school bus bound for Attucks Junior High. ``It's not fair for us to go on a federal holiday.'' A lot of students _ and parents _ apparently had the same opinion, as the absentee rate shot up to near 40 percent at some schools. Overall, attendance was termed ``fair'' by officials. Frank Tout, principal at Howe High School, estimated that between 60 percent and 65 percent of the school's 1,609 students were in class. Although Christmas vacation started earlier at city schools than at other school systems, another day off would have been nice, most students agreed. ``I don't like it,'' said Jesse Harper, 12, another Attucks student. ``My dad is staying home today and I wanted to stay with him.'' But some were more than ready to return. ``I wanted to go to school today,'' said Missy Frazier, 14, an eighth-grader at Attucks. ``I get bored at home.'' 
Sudan's prime minister told trade union leaders Monday the economy still needs price increases, but his listeners hinted that imposing them might lead to a recurrence of violent strikes. Steep price increases announced Dec. 26 led to demonstrations and a general strike. Four people died and scores were injured before union leaders called off the protests Saturday, two days after the government rescinded the price increases. On Monday, more than 500 leaders of trade and professional organizations met with Prime Minister Sadek Mahdi to discuss the impact of the violence and the government's failure to endorse an initiative to end civil war in southern Sudan. In addition to the rollback on prices, the government gave in to a demand by the Sudanese Workers' Trade Union Federation to make salary increases of up to 500 percent retroactive to July 1, instead of Dec. 1 as the government had ordered. While Mahdi conceded the price increases may have been too high _ as much as 600 percent for sugar _ he said prices on some items had to be raised. He promised to stay away from important foods, however, and said subsidies on sorghum, the Sudanese staple, and medicines wouldn't be touched. ``There are other possibilities and other more reasonable (price) increases that I don't want to go into now,'' Mahdi said. He said the price of sugar, extremely important in the Sudanese culture, must be increased to cover its production costs and to prevent smuggling into neighboring countries. ``Any steps must not affect the workers and struggling people and add to their burdens,'' said Abdel-Wahab Sinada, representative of the professional associations. ``We reject any increase in prices. We are ready for civil disobedience and general strikes.'' Professional groups carry considerable weight in Sudan and played a decisive role in the 1985 military coup that ousted the authoritarian pro-Western president, Gaafar Nimeiri. Tradesmen and students were the major forces behind last week's disturbances. Western observers fear the trade and professional unions might join forces with the Democratic Unionist Party, still angered over Mahdi's handling of the peace agreement it reached a month and a half ago with the rebel Sudan People's Liberation Army. During the strike, the Unionists resigned from the coalition Cabinet headed by the Umma Party in sympathy with the demonstrators and outrage over the prime minister's stand on the peace agreement. Mahdi apparently refused to officially endorse the agreement because of a clause advocating suspension of the 1,400-year-old Islamic legal code, which was sure to anger the fundamentalist National Islamic Front _ the third-largest Cabinet partner and Mahdi's buffer against his traditional opponents, the Democratic Unionists. Publicly, Mahdi says he objects to the pact's clauses eliminating defense treaties with other countries and ending emergency rule, which has been Nimeiri's overthrow in 1985. The unions have been demanding immediate implementation of the peace plan and a cease-fire in the 5{-year-old civil war on ground it would save the country $275 million a year. Sudan's foreign debt is $14 billion, and Khartoum owes more than $900 million in interest it can't pay. ``It is slowly but surely building up into another explosive situation,'' a Western political observer said on condition of anonymity. ``The (Democratic Unionist Party) is gathering forces with the southern and communist parties and the trade and professional unions, calling for implementing the peace initiative. This will sooner or later spill into the streets in demonstrations, and this could be ugly.'' John Garang, leader of the Sudan People's Liberation Army, called for Mahdi's resignation in a New Year's Day radio broadcast from Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. He suggested direct peace talks with Sudanese army generals, ``especially those fighting in the south.'' Defending his views on the agreement, Mahdi told union leaders, ``We do not disagree on the peace issue, but there are specific points in the initiative that have to be resolved.'' He agreed to form a committee with the union leaders to discuss possible solutions to the civil war and the economic situation. 
Rival Shiite Moslems fought with grenades in Beirut and rockets in south Lebanon's shattered apple orchards Monday, the third day of their latest battle in a sporadic war that began nine months ago. Police said eight people were killed and 25 wounded in the Shiite slums of south Beirut, and five were slain and 14 wounded in fighting near Israel's ``security zone'' along the border. Moslem-controlled Voice of the Nation radio said Iran was sending Deputy Foreign Minister Mohammad Javad Larijani to negotiate peace between Amal, a Shiite militia backed by Syria, and the pro-Iranian Hezbollah, which is strong in the slums and has tried to expand in south Lebanon. The report gave no details. Twenty people have been killed and 47 wounded since the fighting began Saturday, said a police spokesman, whose name cannot be used under standing rules. Syrian peacekeeping troops called a ``total and comprehensive'' cease-fire at midday, but it collapsed four hours later. Bulldozers demolished sandbag barricades and earth mounds set up by both sides along a stretch of the slums along the highway to Beirut's airport. Hezbollah fighters in black headbands hurled grenades in a charge backed by mortar fire and overran a police station in south Beirut's Ghobeiri district, the spokesman said. Amal militiamen responded with heavy fire from tanks stationed in nearby woods as a dozen policemen sprinted to safety under heavy rain, the spokesman added. He said the two sides were locked in house-to-house fighting in Ghobeiri and the neighboring district of Haret Hreik. Amal, a mainstream militia whose name means Hope, and the fundamentalist Hezbollah (Party of God) are struggling for dominance of Lebanon's 1 million Shiites, the largest sect in the country. Each accuses the other of starting the latest battle, their most intense since November, when 40 people were killed and 87 were wounded during six days of fighting in west and south Beirut. Police said thousands of residents had been living in basements and bomb shelters since New Year's Eve in the Shiyah, Ghobeiri, Haret Hreik and Mesharafiyeh slum districts. Several Beirut radio stations said Syria planned to review its deployment of 4,500 soldiers in the slums to ``improve their performance and prevent further fighting.'' Syria is Lebanon's main power broker and has about 40,000 soldiers in the country, including at least 7,500 in the Moslem sectors of Beirut. It first sent troops into the 16 square miles of slums in May, after a three-week battle between Amal and Hezbollah in which 300 people were killed and 1,000 wounded. In south Lebanon, the current fighting is the most serious between Amal and Hezbollah since four days in April in which 62 were killed and 150 wounded. South Lebanon police said Amal and Hezbollah used mortars and rockets against each other's strongholds in Iklim el-Tuffah, the ``apple province'' whose orchards have fallen victim to 13 years of sectarian and factional war. The region runs from Sidon to the border ``security zone'' Israel established in 1985 when it withdrew most of its troops from Lebanon after three years of invasion and ocupation. An Amal statement said its fighters drove Hezbollah militiamen from Jbaa, Jarjou, Arabsalim and Ein Biswar villages with a two-pronged dawn offensive. One from Hezbollah communique said the assault was repulsed ``with God's help'' in two hours of heavy fighting, but Amal then ``clamped a siege on the area, preventing food and water supplies from moving in.'' It said Hezbollah fighters in the area belonged to the Islamic Resistance Front, a coalition of fundamentalist factions that raids the security zone, which is defended by Israeli soldiers and and their predominantly Christian surrogate militia. 
More than 25,000 people demonstrated in the southern town of Bou-Saada after rumors were spread the southern town would not be made an administrative center, Algerian radio reported Monday. The radio reported no violence in the Saharan community 155 miles south of Algiers during the Sunday protests. The protests were prompted by rumors that Bou-Saada was to be removed from a list of 14 communities to be promoted to the level of prefectures, or seats of regional administration. The new status would give the community benefits such as government credits and greater administrative autonomy. Bou-Saada, surrounded by a desert region populated by nomads, has about 60,000 residents. The Interior Ministry said no final decision had been made on which towns would be selected as prefectures in the government's administrative reorganization. 
U.S. Rep. Howard Wolpe will be sworn to a sixth term in office at a hospital where he is recovering from surgery on his left knee, a spokeswoman said Monday. The Kalamazoo Democrat will be sworn Tuesday at Bronson Methodist Hospital in Kalamazoo and will miss ceremonies scheduled in Washington for members of Congress, Link Nicoll said. Wolpe's knee problems stemmed from a series of sports injuries, Nicoll said. He entered the hospital Dec. 12 for outpatient surgery, but an infection forced him to undergo surgery again. Wolpe has been hospitalized since the second operation Dec. 29, Nicoll said, adding that no date for his release has been set. 
Former Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos was listed in satisfactory and stable condition Monday but could walk a little, a doctor said. St. Francis Medical Center Nursing Supervisor Mary Kravutske read a statement by Dr. Livingston Wong that said Marcos was able to stand and take a few steps alone, but was still very weak. Kravutske said Marcos, 71, would remain hospitalized at least until Tuesday. Marcos was admitted to the hospital Thursday after suffering another episode of congestive heart failure. He spent nine days in St. Francis last month suffering the same symptoms, which indicate a weak heart muscle. Marcos faces federal racketeering charges accusing him of plundering his homeland and stashing much of the money in the United States. A hearing is scheduled later this month to determine whether Marcos is healthy enough to fly to New York for arraignment. Prosecutors contend he is, but defense lawyers say he is too frail. 
Singer Marie Osmond will receive the 1988 Roy Acuff Community Service Award from the Country Music Foundation. She will be honored for her work as national chairwoman of the Osmond Foundation, said Joe Talbot, chairman of the foundation's board of trustees. Her foundation work has included the Children's Miracle Network Telethon, for which she helped raise more than $170 million in the last six years. No date has been announced for the award presentation. Previous recipients are Kenny Rogers, Willie Nelson and Minnie Pearl. The honor is named for a Grand Ole Opry star known as ``the king of country music.'' 
Geraldo Rivera's brawl, Bryant Gumbel's suits and heavyweight boxing champion Mike Tyson's marital antics were among the ``monkey business'' in 1988 accorded their due in TV Guide's eighth annual J. Fred Muggs awards. The awards, named after the chimpanzee who appeared on the original ``Today'' show, appear in the Jan. 7 edition of the magazine. The J. Fred Mugged Award went to Rivera, whose nose was broken in a brawl that broke out between civil-rights leader Roy Innis and a group of white supremacists during the taping of his syndicated show. The Peacock Award for Olympic Splendor went to Gumbel, who TV Guide said set an Olympic record by taking 18 designer suits with him to cover the Games in Seoul forNBC. The on-again, off-again marriage of Tyson and actress Robin Givens won them The Ralph and Alice Kramden Award for the Year's Most Compatible Couple. Among other honors, The Rip Torn Award for the Most Colorful Character Name went to CBS's ``The Cavanaughs,'' which had the title family taking a vacation at a monastery run by a cleric called Abbot Costello. 
Director Lawrence Kasdan is concerned his latest movie, ``The Accidental Tourist,'' may be too subtle for audiences used to such fare as ``The Empire Strikes Back'' and ``Raiders of the Lost Ark'' _ adventure movies Kasdan wrote. His latest film, based on Anne Tyler's novel, is about a travel writer whose 12-year-old son has just died and whose wife has left him. Kasdan said he tried to follow the calm, cool tone of Tyler's writing, but was concerned viewers used to action movies may not be able to give his new film the close attention it requires. ``I worry that American audiences are not used to doing that anymore,'' Kasdan said. ``Everything is handed to them. No small things are considered important in American movies.'' 
Paul S. Trible Jr., who had announced plans to work for a Washington law firm after leaving the Senate this week, says he also will join a Virginia Beach firm. Trible, a Republican who did not seek re-election, will join Shuttleworth Ruloff Giordano &amp; Kahle. He also will practice with Laxalt Washington Perito &amp; Dubuc, a 115-lawyer firm with offices in Washington, Baltimore and New York. The Laxalt firm is headed by former U.S. Sen. Paul Laxalt of Nevada. ``We met with Laxalt on Dec. 21 and went over possible conflicts,'' said Thomas B. Shuttleworth of the Virginia Beach firm. ``They gave us a list of clients, and we gave them a list of clients and we didn't have any conflicts.'' Shuttleworth said it was not unusual for an attorney to practice with more than one firm. Spokesmen from both firms declined to disclose Trible's salary. Trible, a candidate for the GOP nomination for governor in 1989, has expressed confidence in his ability to run a campaign while practicing law. 
``The truth-tellers of the nation,'' have spoken out in a new book by and about teen-agers and their views and hopes. ``I'd like to be able to walk down American streets at midnight with the same ease I'd walk down the street at noon,'' one teen-ager, Tobdeleya Dumas of Cleveland, said in ``Voices of Hope.'' Jana Reiss, of Galesburg, Ill., reflected on the maturation process. ``As people grow older, they begin to see things in shades of gray and not in simple black and white as they did as children,'' she was quoted in the book as saying. ``When I was a child, my dreams were simple and selfish. Now I hope for feelings, not things. I dream more for my friends and family, and less for myself.'' American teen-agers are ``incredibly idealistic'' and want to help solve society's problems, but often are frustrated because they think they lack the means to make a difference, said Greg Jao, an editor of the book. ``They honestly want to be able to talk to their parents and be involved in politics, but they're also very cynical because they don't feel any real change can come'' from their efforts, said Jao, 20. ``Voices of Hope'' follows ``Teenagers Themselves'' and ``Voices of Conflict,'' a series researched by the staff of the student newspaper at Glenbard East High School in this western Chicago suburb. Staff members of the Echo newspaper traveled to 35 cities, interviewed 2,000 students and collected questionnaires from 5,000 more in all 50 states, under the direction of journalism teacher and newspaper adviser Howard Spanogle. ``Teen-agers are unique because they are the truth tellers of the nation,'' Spanogle said. Students interviewed, ages 14 through 19, ranged from the ``wildly hedonistic stereotype'' of the inner cities to the ``deeply religious'' of more rural areas, Jao said. ``As opposed to statistical studies ... we've tried for much more of a qualitative approach,'' said Jao, now an English student at the University of Chicago. Students want an end to all forms of discrimination _ against them as young people and against minorities, Spanogle said. They seek ``communication between generations, equal treatment for teen-agers, openness to all viewpoints, and awareness of social problems,'' said Spanogle, who has been advising the newspaper for 21 years. Researchers also interviewed adults such as U.S. Sen. Paul Simon, D-Ill., for perspectives on issues that most concern teen-agers. Nobel Prize-winner Leon Lederman, director of Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory near Batavia, Ill., asserts that science education in the United States is ``bloody awful.'' And Doug Wood, director of youth ministries at Dallas' First Baptist Church, suggests ways the church can elevate the moral fiber of young people. Sean Mix of Seattle said of teen-age drinking: ``Teen views and adult views don't really differ ... when it comes to handling pressure ... because we handle it about the same way. Our parents drink, and so do we.'' Megan McKinney of Abilene, Texas, talked about morals. ``In order to know what is right or wrong ... consult the Bible. Unfortunately, in an increasingly immoral society, people succumb to their natural urges rather than overcome them,'' she said. ``One reason I believed sex should only happen within the marriage vows came from the examply my parents `supposedly' set,'' said a South Carolina girl who was not identified by name. ``When I found out a year ago that my parents were married in '69 instread of '68, making me a child conceived out of wedlock, I was shocked and confused.'' The ideal family was on the mind of Kimberly Aretta of Uniontown, Pa. ``The perfect family would be one that is always there for you even if you're wrong ... one that understands the feelings of a teen-ager and realizes we will make plenty of mistakes,'' she said. Jao said the book is a challenge to America to find ways for teen-agers to channel their hopes and enthusiasm. ``Teens are incredibly idealistic,'' he said. ``There's a real frustration people perceive as apathy, that they don't know how to channel that energy. We need to find ways to channel that incredible idealism.'' The book and the two others in the series were published by Adama Books of New York and is available at major bookstores nationwide. 
Four teen-agers who died in an accidental pipe-bomb explosion apparently were building the powerful device for fun, not for political or criminal reasons, according to reports published Monday. ``They were all bright kids. ... Everything points to kids looking at this as a challenge, like something they saw on TV and said, `Hey, I can do that,''' an unidentified police official told The (Baltimore) Sun. Another police source, also unidentified, told The Washington Post the youths may have been planning a prank, ``like blowing up a flagpole or something.'' Dov Fischman, 18, and Samir Gafsi, 17, honor students who graduated last year from Bethesda's Walt Whitman High School, were killed instantly Saturday when the bomb detonated, apparently as they were assembling it, police said. Two other youths, Bruno Perrone, 18, a freshman studying chemistry at the University of California at Berkeley, and Gustavo Machado, 15, a sophomore at Walt Whitman, died later at Suburban Hospital in Bethesda. Diego Soromenho-Ramos, a Walt Whitman classmate of the older youths, said his friends were fascinated with chemistry. ``They were probably going to go to some field and see how big a hole they could make,'' he said. ``They were peaceful people. They would never try to hurt anybody.'' The explosion occurred about 3:10 a.m. in a garage attached to a brick home rented by Machado's parents. Because Gafsi and Fischman were killed instantly, investigators believe they were standing over the pipe bomb when it exploded, Montgomery County Police spokesman Harry E. Geehreng said. Laboratory tests on metal and debris collected at the site by agents from the Treasury Department's Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms weren't expected to yield any results until later this week, investigators said. Gafsi, a National Merit Scholar, was a freshman at Williams College in Williamstown, Mass., where his studies included Japanese and classical Arabic. Fischman, a first-year honors program student at the University of Maryland, planned to major in chemistry and math. He had won prizes for his work in both subjects in high school, his family said. According to Gafsi's father, Salem Gafsi, Fischman's interests also included explosives, ``but in the positive sense. He's a gifted kid.''  
A woman recognized her live-in companion on a television show they were watching about a fugitive wanted in the beating death of his mother, authorities said Monday. Before Nicholas Dolce, 38, left in the woman's car ``he indicated to her he was the person'' described on the show, FBI agent William Nettles said. ``America's Most Waned'' featured a profile of Dolce, accused of beating his mother to death and setting fire to her home in Trinidad, Colo., on May 2, 1986. Dolce was last reported seen in Pueblo, Colo., in August 1987, according to the program. Dolce, who Nettles said is listed among the FBI's 10 most wanted fugitives, was at large Monday. Authorities described him as a drug user with dark, shoulder-length hair who occasionally dressed as a woman. The woman who recognized Dolce had known him for several weeks, Nettles said, ``but (he) has been in town longer than that.'' Authorities refused to release her name. Dolce apparently had worked on shrimp boats while in the area, Nettles said. 
A resident of a cramped retirement home beat to death two sleeping residents with his walking cane and injured four others in a room-to-room rampage sparked by squabbles with roommates, police said Monday. There apparently was friction between Henry Thomas, 88, a retired fruit picker and sometime junk collector, and other residents of the Reflections I house, said Dade City Police Chief Phil Thompson. ``There was some bitterness in the home between our suspect Mr. Thomas and the other residents of the home,'' he said. ``Evidently that bitterness, from what we can tell, had been building. Evidently, in the early morning hours of New Year's Day, this thing came to a head and Mr. Thomas took his action.'' Thomas was charged with two counts of first-degree murder in the deaths of his 90-year-old roommate, Max Nickbarge, and resident Myrtle Smith, 73. Charges were being prepared in the injuries to the other four residents and should be filed this week, Thompson said. Nickbarge, 89-year-old Frank Tear Sr. and Thomas shared a 9-foot by 10-foot room, and the police chief said the cramped quarters may have contributed to the outburst. Tear, father-in-law of the home's owner Helen Tear, had a fractured skull and was in critical but stable condition Monday at Tampa General Hospital, Thompson said. Esther Kelly, 67, was in guarded condition at Humana Hospital in Dade City with two broken arms, cuts on her face and head, and bruises. Ruth Godfrey, 71, and Lucy Mitchell, 85, were both listed in fair condition Monday with facial cuts at East Pasco Medical Center in Zephyrhills about 10 miles south of here. Ms. Godfrey also suffered a broken collarbone. The bodies were discovered by staff nurses about 8 a.m. New Year's Day. Thompson said he believes the beatings took place between 1:30 a.m. and 7:30 a.m. Thomas, who walks with a cane, was found walking through Dade City, a quiet town of 6,000 people northeast of Tampa, 9:30 p.m. Sunday. He was described as jovial when confronted by police. Thompson said Thomas had not admitted to the crime, but police had strong physical evidence. Thomas's cane and clothes were splattered with blood. Autopsies were planned Tuesday. ``We feel the murder weapon involved is the cane of Mr. Thomas,'' Thompson said. ``It is a heavy, oak-type cane.'' The chief said Thomas ``is a rather large individual who gets around better than most people think.'' Thomas was being held without bond Monday. One of the nurses who found the bodies of Nickbarge and Ms. Smith had slept only a few feet away from where the attack occurred, police said. ``Some furniture had been overturned, and there was broken glass on the floor,'' said Sgt. Dale Neuner. Nine people lived in the wood-frame home just outiside Dade City. All six victims had been sleeping in rooms near the front of the house, said Neuner. Helen Tear said Thomas had problems getting along with the other residents and would grow angry at Nickbarge for moving things in the house. She said he also grew angry when his roommates squabbled. ``I would tell him if it bothers you, go away and walk for a little while,'' she said. 
A dealer accused of trading in thousands of stolen Nazi-era documents from a U.S.-run archives handed over nearly 800 of the records Monday, a Justice Ministry spokeswoman said. Andre Huesken, a Hamburg dealer in military memorabilia, turned the material over to West Berlin court officials, the justice spokeswoman said on condition of anonymity. She said she did not know details of the contents of the 780 documents that were returned. Huesken is charged with trading in goods stolen from the U.S.-run Nazi Document Center in West Berlin. He has been on trial since Dec. 5 with three other defendants. Prosecutors accuse a second defendant, Alfred Darko, of stealing at least 4,000 documents from 1984-87 and selling them to another defendant, West Berlin antiques dealer Henry Berger. Darko, from the Ivory Coast, is a former employee of the documents center and has admitted receiving more than $8,000 for supplying the papers. Berger says he did not realize the documents were stolen. He says he passed them on to military memorabilia trader Herbert Borrmann of West Berlin and collected a fee as a go-between. Borrmann is accused of providing the stolen documents, in turn, to Huesken for sale to buyers in foreign countries, including Britain and the United States. The Nazi Document Center houses about 30 million files from the Third Reich era, including Nazi Party membership lists, marriage applications of prominent Nazis, and military information. The center, which is in the U.S. sector of the city, has been operated and maintained by the U.S. government since 1953. Used mainly by scholars and government agencies, it contains the world's largest collection of Nazi records. No Americans have been charged in the case. 
About 250 arms-making plants will be restructured and included in a plan to produce machinery for growing and processing food, the official news agency Tass reported Monday. ``A special program has been drawn up for the coming eight years that provides for the creation and mastering of the batch production of highly efficient equipment,'' Tass said in a dispatch based on an interview with Deputy Premier Igor Belousov. It said the new equipment was intended for smaller lease-contract farming operations as well as collective and state farms. Huge quantities of food are lost in transportation and storage in the highly centralized Soviet economy. President Mikhail S. Gorbachev is promoting smaller farming operations, involved with specific tasks or parcels of land, to encourage farmers to work harder and produce more. Tass said research and design work on farming and processing machinery would increase seven-fold. ``Some 250 arms-manufacturing plants have been drawn into this work,'' it quoted Belousov as saying. ``Some industrial enterprises of this (arms) industry that were planned are being switched to peaceful production.'' He said Soviet defense policies should lead to arms production at a lower level still sufficient to defend the the Soviet Union and its allies, according to the Tass report. Gorbachev has recommended diverting some resources from the military to production of consumer goods. He says the Soviet Union needs an easing of world tensions so more time and resources can be devoted to solving internal problems. 
Libya's official news agency said Monday that the United States is using allegations about a chemical weapons plant as a pretext to attack the radical North African Arab nation and kill its leader, Col. Moammar Gadhafi. In West Germany, Bonn government officials announced they were examining the records of Imhausen-Chemie of Lahr, a company said to be involved in the purported plant. But no criminal investigation has begun into the activities of the company, local prosecutor Werner Botz said. Imhausen-Chemie director Juergen Hippenstiel-Imhausen rejected the accusations in an interview with South German Radio in Stuttgart that was broadcast late Monday. He said he hoped the government probe would clear his firm of any wrongdoing. Libya's JANA agency, monitored in Rome, noted that a report Sunday in a United Arab Emirates newspaper quoted unidentified Arab sources as saying America planned to send an assassination team to kill Gadhafi during an attack on Libya. The daily Al-Khaleej said a U.S. task force trained for the attack is in Italy, Spain and aboard U.S. warships in the Mediterranean and said it could come this month. It said the strike would include air raids on a Libyan nuclear research center at Tajura and the purported chemical weapons plant at Rabtah. JANA said on Monday that a group it called the International League in Defense of the Mediterranean condemned the sailing of a new U.S. 13-ship carrier battle group for the Mediterranean. A U.S. Navy spokesman in Washington called the sailing a routine deployment of the 6th Fleet. A Navy spokesman in Italy said the new group comes at the time of the normal rotation of the ships in the Mediterranean. The State Department in Washington said Monday it had no officer on duty to answer questions. The report by Al-Khaleej report carried no dateline but appeared to originate in Tripoli, the Libyan capital. JANA said, ``The uncovering of this terrorist plan reveals and exposes clearly the real motives and dimensions of the hysterical campaign'' the U.S. government has mounted against Libya. It said the report proves U.S. allegations about a chemical arms plant ``were excuses and pretexts for an operation of premeditated individual murder.'' Washington says Libya is about to produce chemical weapons at the plant near Rabtah, about 50 miles southwest of Tripoli. Libya says the plant makes pharmaceuticals and stresses Libya's commitment to treaties banning chemical weapons. President Reagan has said the United States discussed with other North Atlantic Treaty Organization nations the possibility of military action against the plant. In Bonn, federal government spokesman Norbert Schaefer told a news conference authorities ``had no indication or evidence to verify the American suspicions'' that West German industry was involved. He said the allegations were brought to the government's attention during Chancellor Helmut Kohl's visit to Washington in November, but Bonn had no ``concrete information'' to work with. ``We must guarantee that German companies do not make profits from the construction of death factories in Third World countries,'' Helmut Ohnewald, a Christian Democratic state legislator from Baden-Wuerttemberg, told reporters. The Christian Democratic Union in Baden-Wuerttemberg, where Imhausen-Chemie is located, issued a statement demanding a full probe into the allegations. The company's Hippenstiel-Imhausen said Imhausen-Chemie had nothing to do with the Libyan factory, but had ``business contacts'' in Libya relating to provision of materials for a plant to produce plastic bags. Finance Ministry spokesman Karlheinz von den Driesch confirmed that a foreign trade investigation was launched Friday as a ``precautionary'' measure once Bonn learned that the name of the German firm implicated by the United States was to be made public. He said no evidence was uncovered to suggest Imhausen-Chemie was involved in wrongdoing. Von den Driesch said the investigation would try to find whether materials could have been shipped to Libya indirectly through a third country. Companies from West Germany, Japan and Italy are believed to have helped Libya build the plant or the adjacent industrial complex, according to news reports in the United States. Japan told the United States its citizens believed they were involved in building a fertilizer plant. At least two West German firms provided Libya with chemicals, technical assistance and special pumps and piping for the plant, U.S. News &amp; World Report magazine said in a report released Sunday. One company was identified as Imhausen-Chemie, the New York Times said Sunday, quoting U.S. government officials. 
West Bank lawyers said Monday they would boycott military courts for one month to protest what they called a complete lack of due process for Palestinian detainees. The announcement coincided with the demolition of two homes in the occupied West Bank and came a day after the deportation of 13 Palestinians, fueling new charges of human rights violations by Israel. In the West Bank and Gaza Strip, at least 10 Palestinians were wounded Monday in scattered clashes between troops and stone-throwing youths, Arab hospital officials said. The army said it was checking the reports. The wounded included two girls, aged 12 and 14, reported in critical condition after being shot in the head during a clash at Gaza's Bureij refugee camp, Arab doctors said. An army patrol came under a shooting attack near Dahiriya in the West Bank, but no injuries resulted. The army surrounded the village and conducted searches, Israel radio said. In Gaza City, Palestinians staged a spontaneous strike to protest Sunday's deporations. Six of the deportees were from Gaza. An army official denied the lawyers' allegations and defended Israeli actions to quell the nearly 13-month Palestinian uprising against Israeli occupation. ``We believe we have a liberal judicial system in the territories, but we should not be judged in the same context as Western countries that are not in a state of war,'' said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. Deportations and house demolitions ``are among our tools for maintaining control,'' he said. The United States and other Western nations have condemned such practices, saying they violate international human rights conventions. At a news conference, Palestinian lawyer Bahij Tamini said his clients were being denied their rights at every step in the military legal system as part of a strategy to crush the uprising, known by the Arabic word ``intefadeh.'' The boycott is a ``cry of protest, one last attempt to get through to the authorities,'' Tamini said. He said attorneys face difficulties in locating clients; attorneys frequently are barred from meeting with their clients; bail requests are routinely denied; and trial dates are often not coordinated with attorneys. ``We feel handcuffed and chained ourselves,'' said Tamini. Added colleague Jonathan Kuttab: ``Lawyers should be allowed to be lawyers, instead of being collaborators in a system that pretends to be legal, but isn't.'' Palestinian lawyers in the Gaza Strip have been boycotting military courts for a year to protest similar conditions. Felicia Langer, an Israeli lawyer who represents Palestinian clients, said she feared deportations and other strict measures would increase under the government formed last month by Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir. The army official sharply denied the lawyers' allegations. He said that earlier, the sheer numbers caused delays in helping lawyers to find clients, but now the army has set up a special office to help lawyers find their clients. Attorneys are not barred from seeing clients, trial dates are coordinated with lawyers, and bail has been granted in hundreds of cases, he said. In mid-December, 5,542 Palestinians were in detention, including 2,370 awaiting charges, 1,380 awaiting trial, 442 convicted and 1,350 held without charges for up to six months in so-called adminstrative detention, the army said. The West Bank lawyers estimated that since the beginning of the uprising, nearly 40,000 Palestinians have been jailed at one time or another. In addition to the detentions, 49 Palestinians have been deported since the beginning of the uprising, compared with 43 in the three-year period from January 1985 to November 1987. Since the uprising, the army has demolished or sealed 151 houses in the West Bank, including two bulldozed Monday in the Balata refugee camp, according to the Palestinian human rights group Law in the Service Man. Thirty-eight houses also were reported torn down or sealed in the Gaza Strip. The army official said deportations were carried out selectively and only as a last resort. Houses usually are torn down before the owners are convicted of any crime. 
PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti (AP) _ The former mayor of Port-au-Prince blamed for the church massacre of 12 people has fled Haiti after receiving a safe-conduct pass from the military government. Franck Romain left Port-au-Prince on Saturday after spending three months in the Dominican Embassy, the Information Ministry said. He was given political asylum in the embassy after the Sept. 17 military coup that brought Lt. Gen. Prosper Avril to power. The ministry statement, issued Sunday, did not say where Romain had gone, but he was believed to be in the Dominican Republic, which shares the island of Hispaniola with Haiti. He was given an official pass assuring his safe departure at the request of the Dominican government, the ministry said. In the Dominican Republic, the daily newspaper El Nacional reported Monday that Romain was in the country on Sunday. The newspaper quoted sources in the Dominican Embassy in Haiti as saying Romain was taken to the border in an embassy automobile under military escort. Once at the border, Romain traveled to Santo Domingo, where he is staying with friends, the newspaper reported. El Nacional said Romain's wife and a son left the embassy two weeks earlier. But it did not say whether they also traveled to the Dominican Republic. Jose del Carmen Acosta, the Dominican ambassador in Haiti, declined comment. Romain, who has not been charged, was accused of directing the Sept. 11 massacre at a Roman Catholic church in a Port-au-Prince slum. Attackers armed with guns, machete knives and spikes killed 12 people and wounded at least 70 others. The Information Ministry said Romain's departure did not ``prejudice the legal proceedings'' against him, but did not elaborate. The former mayor was a reputed leader of the Tonton Macoutes, the dreaded militia set up during the 29-year Duvalier dictatorship, and perpetrators of the church massacre were identified as City Hall employees. The soldiers who overthrew Lt. Gen. Henri Namphy in September said they were provoked by the atrocity and wanted to end state-sponsored violence. Namphy fled to the Dominican Republic and remains there with his wife and daughter. In November, the government announced it was investigating Romain for unspecified crimes. Arnold Antonin, co-director of the National Network for the Defense of Human Rights, said Monday that Romain's departure would have ``an adverse effect on the human rights credibility of the Haitian government.'' ``Franck Romain was one of the big bosses of the paramilitary gangs in Haiti,'' Antonin said. ``The granting of a safe-conduct pass is especially disturbing now that we all are expecting spectacular measures on the part of the government to eliminate these gangs from national life.'' Avril has pledged to purge the army of the Tonton Macoutes and carry out sweeping democratic reforms. Namphy led the military junta that assumed power when dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier fled to France in 1986. Duvalier assumed the presidency in 1971 on the death of his father, Francois Duvalier, who was elected president in 1957. 
Shifting air masses brought wind gusts of more than 70 mph blasting through parts of Montana, Colorado and Wyoming on Monday, while parts of Oklahoma, Kansas and Missouri were encased in dense fog. Winds gusted to 71 mph at Livingston, Mont., and gusts of up to 75 mph were expected throughout the day in the upper Yellowstone Valley. The stiff winds were being caused by the difference in air masses _ one over the central intermountain region, the other over the upper Mississippi Valley _ that created a pocket of rapid pressure change allowing the winds to howl through the eastern slopes of the northern Rockies. Winds of up to 75 mph were reported in the northeast foothills of Colorado, near Rollinsville and Squaw Mountain. High wind warnings also were issued for northwest Wyoming, where gusts of 46 mph were clocked at Rawlins and Laramie. A stationary front over the southern Plains brought light rain and dense fog to northern and central Oklahoma, much of Kansas and western Missouri. Light snow fell over northeast Kansas and northwest Missouri. Scattered showers dotted the lower Mississippi Valley. West and northwest winds swirling around a low pressure center over southwest Quebec brought widespread snow to eastern Upper Michigan and lower Michigan. The same pressure system also produced snow over western New York. A warm front curved across parts of New England and snow fell over Maine. Two inches of new snow fell at Caribou, Maine. Temperatures continued to plummet below zero over eastern North Dakota and central Minnesota. In Grand Forks, N.D., it was 15 below zero with a wind chill of minus 45. On the other extreme, Miami had a record high for the date of 85, breaking the mark of 84 degrees set in 1967. Temperatures around the nation at 2 p.m. EST ranged from 13 below at Grand Forks to 89 at Harlingen, Texas. The nation's low for the morning was minus 32 at Warroad, Minn. Tuesday's forecast called for scattered snow from the Great Lakes into northern parts of the lower Ohio Valley into southern New England, and scattered rain from the Middle Atlantic States into the Gulf Coast. Snow also was likely from eastern Washington into western Montana, with widespread rain across the Pacific Northwest. High temperatures should be in the 30s and 40s across much of the nation, dipping into the teens and 20s from the northern Plains through the Great Lakes into New England. Highs should warm into the 50s and 60s from the California Coast through the southern Plateau and southern Rockies, the central high and southern Plains, Arkansas and the lower Mississippi Valley to the southern Atlantic Coast. Highs should be in the 70s from southern Texas through the Gulf Coast, rising into the 80s over the central and southern Florida peninsula. 
Iranian Premier Hussein Mussavi said Monday that Iran is nearing military self-sufficiency by building an advanced fighter plane and maintaining its aging U.S.-made F-4 and F-5 fighters, Tehran television reported. The broadcast, monitored in Nicosia, said Mussavi spoke after inspecting Iranian air force facilities, but showed footage of only one single-propeller trainer plane said to be locally built. Mussavi said Iran now was able to repair its U.S.-made Hawk surface-to-air missiles without outside help. He also said an Iranian-made passenger plane was tested successfully and could be used for flights between smaller provincial cities, according to the TV report. It quoted Mussavi as saying that the Iranian navy now was overhauling Iran's Boeing 747 passenger planes, which used to undergo maintenance abroad at considerable expense. A Tehran-based foreign military attache said he was ``highly skeptical'' about Iranian claims of self-sufficiency in producing and maintaining aircraft. He spoke to The Associated Press from London on the condition of anonymity. The source said both the Iranian military and Iranair, the national airline, lacked the skills and equipment needed for such operations. He said Iran's Boeings were regularly serviced in Western Europe and that complex maintenance operations are done abroad, or by foreign engineers specially flown in for the purpose. Asked about Iranian claims of building an advanced fighter, he said: ``If the Iranians had been successful ... they would be the first ones to roll it out and show it to the world. ... We in Tehran have seen nothing.'' Iran has been seeking to rebuild its air force after the cease-fire last August in its war with Iraq. Before the war started in September 1980, Iran had 447 combat aircraft _ 190 F-4s, 166 F-5s, 77 F-14s and 14 RF-4 reconaissance jets. Because of a chronic lack of spare parts, due to a U.S. arms embargo and combat losses, Western analysts estimate Iran now has about 50 planes operational _ 20 F-4s, 20 F-5s, and 10 F-14s, some without radar. 
The Soviet Union's chief rabbi says the Soviet Anti-Zionist Committee has been dismantled and he hopes for better cooperation with Jewish groups in the West, a Jewish organization said Monday. Abraham Shayevitch, the chief rabbi, made the announcement in a letter sent Monday to the Edgar Bronfman, chairman of the World Jewish Congress, said Avi Beker, executive director of the WJC in Israel. Shayevitch is in Israel for a two-week visit. American Jewish leaders said in December they were told by letter that the committee, which generated propaganda against Israel, would be dismantled by the end of the year. The letter to prominent Jewish leaders in New York purportedly was written by Samuel Zivs, a Soviet lawyer who helped found the committee in 1983. Beker said Monday about the chief rabbi's letter: ``The significance is that from now on Jewish organizations can have normal relations with the Soviet rabbis and we can start working together toward building a normal communal life for Jews in the Soviet Union.'' He said in an interview the World Jewish Congress had boycotted Shayevitch and other Soviet rabbis before the letter was written. The Anti-Zionist Committee, a government-sponsored body, included some well-known Jewish personalities in the Soviet Union and has been a source of embarrassment for Jewish groups dealing with officials of Soviet Jewry. It was intended to lend credibility to anti-Israeli policies the Soviet Union followed until recently. Shayevitch said in the letter to Bronfman, according to Beker: ``In my meetings here ... I announced unequivocally that I am not a member of the anti-Zionist committee and that the committee was dismantled. Furthermore ... I regret that such a committee existed in the past, but I emphasize that I have never participated in actions against Jews or the state of Israel.'' He said he ``understood ... this announcement could clear the way for working relationship with the WJC,'' Beker reported. Israeli Jews have accused Shayevitch of lacking interest in Jewish culture. He is appointed by the Soviet government and presides over the Grand Synagogue in Moscow. He arrived in Israel last Tuesday with Chaim Levite, chief rabbi of Leningrad, on the first trip to the Holy Land by Soviet religious leaders since the Bolshevik revolution of 1917. They are guests of the Tel Aviv religious council. Moscow broke diplomatic ties after the 1967 Middle East war, in which Israel captured territory from the Kremlin's Arab allies. Relations have improved recently, and the governments have exchanged low-level diplomatic missions. The Soviets allowed 19,300 Jews to emigrate in 1988, and the December emigration figure reached a nine-year monthly high of 3,650, Israel's government-sponsored Public Council for Soviet Jewry said Monday. 
A close-knit community grieved Monday over the loss of 10 people in a New Year's Day fire whose cause investigators said may never be known. A mother who lost four children in the blaze remained hospitalized Monday after becoming hysterical, and an elementary school called on a crisis intervention team to counsel children who lost five classmates. ``I have a suspicion we may never be able to determine the source of this fire,'' said Elmer Baltes, a deputy state fire marshal, as he surveyed the smoldering ruins of the home that caught fire early Sunday, killing eight children and two adults. ``The extent of the fire makes it very difficult.'' Arson has been ruled out, and a fuel oil space heater appeared to have been turned off, Baltes said, but a wood-burning stove, electrical problems, smoking material, a Christmas tree and children playing with matches all were being investigated as possible sources of the fire. Remer Fire Chief Leo Renn said the fire spread so quickly it was unlikely anyone woke up before being overcome by smoke. Three walls and the roof of the two-story house already had collapsed when firefighters in the north-central Minnesota town of about 400 people arrived at 2:25 a.m., Renn said. Nancy Watson, who returned home from celebrating her 32nd birthday with her husband, John, to find her house in ashes, became hysterical and repeatedly tried to rush inside, authorities said. She remained hospitalized Monday. Killed were the Watson's four children, Jenny, 14, Samantha, 11, Edward, 9, and William, 8; Mrs. Watson's sister and brother-in-law, Becky and Jean Smischney; their two children, Jay, 10, and Kimberly, 8; and two neighbor children, Michelle Bastle, 10, and Robin Bastle, 12. Tammy Grover, 18, a stepsister of John Watson, told investigators Monday the house had three smoke detectors. Renn had said earlier there were no smoke detectors in the home, but when told of Grover's comment he said he may have been wrong. The fire was discovered by passing motorists, who stopped at the home of Melody Berczyk across the road. ``It was one big ball of flame right then,'' said Berczyk, who called the fire department. She said she had looked out the window a half-hour earlier before going to bed and saw no flames. ``The whole town is in shock. I'm still in shock,'' said Mayor Chuck Gilstead. Friends and neighbors set up a memorial fund at a bank and donation cans in a cafe. Mike Doro, principal of the 147-student elementary school which five of the children attended, said he has asked for a crisis intervention team to come to the school Tuesday. ``Being a small elementary school, it's like one big family. I really don't know what's going to happen,'' Doro said. ``Hopefully, we'll just all pull together.'' 
Sir Christopher Andrewes, a prominent virologist who was on the team that discovered the influenza virus, has died at the age of 92, the Times of London reported Monday. Andrewes, a leader of research into the causes of the common cold, died Saturday, the newspaper said. The place and cause of death were not specified. He had been deputy director of the National Institute for Medical Research from 1952 until 1961. The son of a pathologist, Andrewes began his career in the same field, starting with a post as an assistant resident physician at the Hospital of the Rockefeller Institution in New York, where he stayed for two years. He decided to concentrate on virology, a field in which he spent nearly 40 years. In 1927, after returning from the United States, he joined the scientific staff of the Medical Research Council at Hampstead in North London. Andrewes worked with colleagues on the role of viruses in transmissible tumors in animals. In 1933, in collaboration with Wilson Smith and Sir Patrick Laidlaw, he carried out the successful transmission of influenza to ferrets. From 1946 to 1960 the virologists strove to isolate the virus in the laboratory. Shortly before Andrewes' 1961 retirement, a team he was part of isolated several viruses from patients with colds. The search then continued in many countries for the possibility of using a specific virus vaccine against cold viruses. A member of many government committees, Andrewes was a former president of the Pathological section of the Royal Society of Medicine and the Society of General Microbiology. Andrewes' wife, the former Kathleen Lamb, died in 1984. He is survived by three sons. 
President Reagan said Monday he is sure Yasser Arafat will tell U.S. officials if he knows anything about the bombing of a Pan American jetliner over Scotland, but that the Palestine Liberation Organization leader has not been heard from yet. Reagan made the comment in response to a reporter's question as he arrived here to complete a holiday stay in California that began Dec. 23 and will end with his return to Washington Thursday. He spent the New Year's weekend in Palm Springs, where he said in his weekly radio address Saturday that President-elect Bush shares his determination to bring the bombers of the Pan Am plane to justice. Last week, the Kuwaiti newspaper Al-Seyasseh quoted an unidentified PLO official as saying the organization was considering a request by U.S. officials that the PLO help in tracking down those responsible for the bombing. Presidential spokesman Roman Popadiuk, however, said the White House had received no communication from Arafat. FBI Director William Sessions said on Sunday, in an interview on the NBC television program ``Meet the Press,'' that Arafat has ``a wealth of information'' that could help in the investigation of the Dec. 21 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 that killed 270 people. As Reagan arrived at Los Angeles International Airport after his flight from Palm Springs aboard Air Force One, a reporter called out, ``Arafat says he wants to help find the bomber.'' ``We've not heard from him,'' the president replied. ``We'll be happy to hear from him. If he has anything to tell us, I'm sure he'll tell us.'' The president and first lady Nancy Reagan are staying at the home in the fashionable Bel Air district of Los Angeles where they will live after his term ends Jan. 20. The only public event on their schedule before their return to Washington is a fund-raising dinner Wednesday night on behalf of Mrs. Reagan's campaign against drug abuse. 
More than 500 people nationwide called a toll-free number for information about anorexia nervosa after watching a television movie about singer Karen Carpenter, who died as a result of the eating disorder. When ``The Karen Carpenter Story'' was broadcast by CBS Sunday night, many affiliate stations displayed the toll-free telephone number of a Philadelphia center devoted to treating eating disorders. Since the number, 800-334-8415, appeared, the Renfrew Center has received more than 500 calls asking for information, Judy Goldstein, the center's director of admissions, said Monday. ``We expected the explosion of interest,'' Ms. Goldstein said. ``We put in extra telephone lines to handle the calls.'' The center is sending callers a brochure with basic information about the disorder and a list of self-help centers throughout the country, said Sam Menaged, a co-founder. ``We were at the phones until 3 a.m.'' Monday, Menaged said. ``The calls started trickling in from the East Coast, then as the night went on, I noticed we were talking to (people in) Kansas and Texas and California and Oregon.'' Ms. Carpenter and her brother, Richard, recorded 20 top 10 hit songs during the 1970s, singing such tunes as ``Close to You,'' ``Top of the World,'' ``We've Only Just Begun,'' and their No. 1 remake of ``Please Mr. Postman.'' She died in 1983 of heart failure due to anorexia nervosa, an eating disorder characterized by an obsession with weight loss and an aversion to food. Although the disorder primarily affects women _ especially young women _ no pattern to the calls existed, Ms. Goldstein said. A number of callers also asked about bulimia, an eating disorder characterized by binging then purging the body of food. ``In the movie, Karen Carpenter had recovered but died several months later,'' Ms. Goldstein said. ``She had done so much damage to her body. ... She wasn't able to make it.'' Recovered anorexics should continue to receive therapy or support, Ms. Goldstein said, so they will be aware of their continued needs. She said the center normally gets about 100 calls per week from people seeking information about the disorder. 
Four leading members of the outlawed Communist Party were jailed Monday, and President Augusto Pinochet's military government charged them with promoting political violence. Those ordered to jail by civilian Judge Domingo Kockish of Santiago were Mireya Baltra, Americo Zorrilla, Jose Sanfuentes and Guillermo Scherping. Ms. Baltra and Zorrilla served in the elected government of the late President Salvador Allende, an avowed Marxist ousted by Pinochet in a 1973 coup. The Communists and two other radical leftist groups were made illegal by the 1980 constitution, which the military wrote. The indictments and jailings coincided with the party's 67th anniversary. As the defendants arrived at the court building Monday, other party members presented them with anniversary cakes. They smiled and ate the cakes while court guards watched without intefering. Charges of promoting political violence stem from a document they issued Dec. 6th announcing the party's first national congress in two decades. It document urged a ``popular rebellion'' and supported ``all forms of struggle,'' including violence, against the government. Party officials said the congress, expected to last months, began later in December at clandestine locations. Attorney General Ambrosio Rodriguez said the Communist document violated the internal security law, which makes promoting political violence a crime. According to the indictments, the party proclamation amounted to ``an apologia for political violence, urging the overthrow of the goverment and the formation of armed popular militias.'' Carlos Caceres, the interior minister, said action was taken against the Communists ``to demonstrate the government's determination to have a peaceful transition to democracy.'' Sanfuentes, one of the defendants, said the government wants to ``prevent the Communist Party's presence in the country's political life.'' 
Critics of a government austerity plan said Monday some provisions could hurt the army by forcing cuts in weapons purchases or training programs. Ministers and legislators from both major political blocs accused Finance Minister Shimon Peres of not working out the details of his plan before announcing it Sunday. His proposals call for controlling inflation by curbing cost-of-living pay increases and cutting about $600 million from government spending on the army, schools, hospitals and welfare. Peres, who leads the center-left Labor Party, said his inflation target was 9 percent by the end of 1989, about half of the current annual figure of 18 percent. He did not say where spending cuts should be made, leaving that to a ministerial committee expected to convene Wednesday or Thursday. He began implementing the plan Sunday by reducing subsidies for food and gasoline. Prices of milk, bread and frozen chicken increased as much as 26 percent on Sunday morning. The government has devalued the shekel by 13 percent since last week as a first step toward reviving export industries hampered by a frozen exchange rate. Israeli news reports said the Peres plan calls for reductions of up to $353 million in the military budget, including $147 million allocated to army operations in the occupied territories, where Palestinians began a rebellion 13 months ago. Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin, also of the Labor Party, said the army might have to reduce training, abandon a 10-year development plan and slow equipment purchases. ``This would seriously harm the army's ability and may destroy security-related industries in Israel,'' he said. ``It does not look justified to me.'' Other planned cuts are said to include up to $118 million in the education budget, which might force parents to pay tuition for kindergarten and high school, the radio said. Deputy Premier David Levy, of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's conservative Likud bloc, said price increases and reductions in spending on schools and welfare could negate a generation of progress and ``tear our society apart.'' 
President Fidel Castro said that Cuba has an enormous responsibility to Third World countries to stick to its present hard-line Marxist-Leninist course, and he spurned market-oriented economic reforms. ``Today we say with more force than ever, socialism or death, Marxism -Leninism or death,'' he said. His one-hour-and-54-minute televised speech Sunday night, celebrating the 30th anniversary of his revolution, was devoted mainly to praising the people of Santiago and other eastern Cuban cities for their revoutionary heritage and support. It is the area Castro calls ``the cradle of the revolution.'' It was only toward the end of his address that Castro made remarks appearently directed toward the Soviet Union and other communist lands that have been veering from rigid adherence to Marxist doctrine. He did not refer directly to the Soviet Union or to the economic and political reforms now being pushed by Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, saying only that ``confusion'' marked the contemporary situation. Castro was more explicit about rejecting Gorbachev's reform policies in earlier speeches. He acknowledged then that changes being attempted under Gorbachev could cause ``difficulties'' for Cuba, and also said that Cuba will never embrace any reforms that ``reek of capitalism.'' Castro addressed a large gathering on Sunday night from the balcony of the municipal building in Santiago, where three decades before, on Jan. 1, 1959, he proclaimed victory for his revolutionary struggle . The president called the revolution a ``beacon of light before the eyes of the world.'' Cuban officials said Castro is expected to deliver a policy address on Wednesday. The friendship between Havana and Moscow seems more tenuous now than it has been for years, although it is far from rupture. The Soviets have chafed about the way Cuba has used the estimated $5 billion a year it receives in Soviet economic aid, and the question has arisen whether this will lead to cutbacks. Moscow thinks Castro has neglected industrial development to spend the money instead on schools and hospitals. Despite Castro's remarks on Sunday, the president now seems more interested in pursuing normal ties with elected governments than in efforts to promote violent revolution, as he once did. Cuba's recent commitment to withdraw its 50,000 troops from Angola by 1991 is one sign of dramatic policy change. He said while attending the presidential inaguration in Mexico in November that he envisions the eventual unity of Cuba and the rest of Latin America. 
U.S. Ambassador Robert Pelletreau discussed Middle East peace prospects and the Pan American jumbo jet bombing with a PLO representative at a meeting in Tunis over the weekend, the White House said Monday. Deputy White House Press Secretary Roman Popadiuk said the meeting Saturday at the U.S. Embassy was requested by Hakam Balaoui, the Palestine Liberation Organization's representative in Tunis, for the purpose of introducing himself to Pelletreau. ``Discussion centered on Middle East issues,'' Popadiuk said. ``Since the meeting was called by Mr. Balaoui, the ambassador was principally in a listening mode.'' ``The ambassador took the opportunity to mention that the United States would welcome any information the PLO is able to develop concerning the Pan Am tragedy,'' the spokesman said. An administration official, speaking on condition he not be identified, said Balaoui took note of Pelletreau's views and told him he would pass them on to PLO leader Yasser Arafat. The official said the discussion did not amount to a request by the United States for PLO assistance, but was in line with the administration's position that it it will welcome information from any source that would help to solve the bombing. The administration official said the meeting was not a continuation of the dialogue between U.S. and PLO representatives which began Dec. 16 in Tunis when Pelletreau met with three members of the PLO executive committee. Popadiuk said there are currently no plans for a further meeting as part of this dialogue. He declined other comment on a report, attributed to PLO spokesman Hani Faidy in Madrid in an interview with Spanish state radio, that such a meeting was scheduled for Saturday. Popadiuk said President Reagan was aware of the meeting between Pelletreau and Balaoui in Tunis. 
The Philippines deported on Monday a Syrian who was held at Manila airport after Australia refused to accept him because it suspected he was linked to a terrorist group, officials said. Immigration authorities said two security men shepherded Vartan Bakerjian onto a Philippine Air Lines flight bound for Bangkok, the capital of Thailand. Immigration official Ruben Domingo said Bakerjian left Bangkok last Tuesday for Sydney, Australia, by way of Manila. Australian authorities sent him back to the Philippines, and he was detained in Manila on Saturday. Domingo said Australian authorities told Manila that Bakerjian tore up a Greek passport which he used when entering the Philippines and switched to a U.S. passport when he arrived in Sydney. ``When the guy was interrogated, the Australians came to the conclusion he might be a suspected terrorist,'' Domingo said. Bakerjian denied being a member of an extremist group, Domingo said, but he added that the Philippines decided to play it safe _ ``especially with recent reports that some action would be taken against Asian airlines by Middle East terrorists.'' Security at Asian airports was increased after a warning was issued that terrorists may try to blow up or hijack an Asian airliner this month. The warning followed the Dec. 21 bombing of a Pan Am jet over Scotland which killed a total of 270 people. 
Shirley Temple Black made an encore appearance as grand marshal of the Rose Parade, which had its 100th outing on a picture-perfect Monday amid dozens of floats laden with blossoms, nostalgia and high hopes for 1989. In a Rose Parade first, Carie Humphries and Ron Simms recited wedding vows before one of the largest audiences ever to witness a marriage ceremony. An estimated 350 million people in 32 countries watched on televison, while half a million thronged the curbside along the 5{-mile route. ``This is like a fairy tale come true. I'm so excited to show off my beautiful bride to everyone. It's a chance to show everybody what true love is about,'' said Simms, 23, who wed Ms. Humphries 45 minutes into the parade. A grateful Vietnamese refugee rode one float. Cancer-stricken youngsters waved from another entry. The Rose Parade may be the grande dame of the New Year's processions, but Dallas' Cotton Bowl sought a little more limelight by adding more marchers, mimes, clowns and mascots to its 32nd annual parade Monday. Country singer Charley Pride was grand marshal. The Orange Parade, held on New Year's Eve, attracted a half-million people to Miami to watch the floats, celebrities and circus elephants that filed by, while 22,000 marchers modeled outrageous costumes in Philadelphia's 89th annual Mummers parade on New Year's Day. ``You are not going to find one person from Michigan complaining,'' said Leslie Footlick, 21, a University of Michigan student among the masses of Rose parade spectators basking in the Pasadena sunshine and 60-degree weather. After the parade, the University of Southern California and University of Michigan were to square off in the Rose Bowl. Former ambassador Shirley Temple Black, who wowed the crowds 50 years earlier as grand marshal when she was America's favorite child actress, led off the flower-bedecked flotilla promptly at 8 a.m. Police described the crowds as well-behaved. There were only 188 arrests, mostly for drunkenness, compared with 444 last year, said parade spokesman Ken Veronda. Some of the more spectacular of the 60 floats included the tallest in parade history, a 75-foot flowered-covered giraffe by Carnation Co., and the Casablanca Fan Co. float featuring a ski run and breath-taking flips by members of the Stuntmen's Association. Vietnamese refugee Vinh Nguyen, riding the Home Savings of America float, reveled in the celebration: ``I feel very great. I'm really happy. It's the best New Year's I have ever had.'' ``Life's important, it's the most important thing in the world,'' said Kathleen Rydberg, 15, of Oxnard, whose liver cancer has been in remission since 1986. She rode a float with other children with cancer. Eighteen floats won trophies, including Unocal's ``Mardi Gras,'' the Sweepstakes winner, depicting a giant masked reveler with a 26-foot headdress. Slice soft drink's ``Luau,'' which won the Grand Marshal's Trophy for its tropical island complete with waterfalls and dancers, broke down and never made an appearance. It was the first float ever to miss the parade, officials said. The City of Alhambra-City of Mobile, Ala., float, Sea World's entry and the Pac-10 float also had mechanical troubles and had to be dragged down Colorado Boulevard via tow trucks _ the only parade vehicles not adorned with flowers. Carnation's giraffe float broke down but was repaired and didn't need towing. Rose Queen Charmaine Beth Shryock reigned with her court on a float followed by another reuniting many former Rose Queens, including 80-year-old Holly Halsted Balthis, the 1930 parade monarch. More than 20 million roses, chrysanthemums, orchids, carnations, marigolds, sweet peas, iris, daisies, daffodils, tulips and other flowers festooned the floats. Twenty marching bands and 275 horses rounded out the two-hour procession. Some of the television audience watched the festivities with special 3-D glasses provided by Fox Television. In previous years, police agencies have estimated a crowd of about 1 million spectators, but this year declined to do so, saying the number was difficult to arrive at. The Pasadena Star-News conducted its own head count using a formula worked out by a retired Jet Propulsion Laboratory physicist, arriving at an estimate of 500,000. About 650 pompon dancers led off the Cotton Parade in Dallas, followed by 13 floats, three giant balloon figures, 15 bands and five equestrian units. Some 100,000 spectators watched for the parade under overcast skies and 55-degree weather, and millions more saw an hour of the event on TV. Organizers had tripled this year's parade budget to $225,000 from last year to try to bring the parade out of the shadow of the Rose and Orange parades. Afterward, the University of Arkansas and the University of California, Los Angeles vied for the Cotton Bowl title. The University of Miami was to play the University of Nebraska in the Orange Bowl Monday night but Miami had its parade Saturday. Among the celebrities waving from the floats were Raymond Burr, ``L.A. Law'' star Susan Ruttan, George Wendt of ``Cheers'' and Sherman Helmsley of ``Amen.'' Marilyn McCoo and Joe Garagiola were the masters of ceremonies. And in Philadelphia, spectators clustered along the 2{-mile Mummers parade route were treated to 14 hours of string bands competing for more than $286,000 in prize money and clowns who cakewalked to the event's perennial theme, ``Oh, Dem Golden Slippers.'' 
Eds: New throughout to update with 2nd meeting between US and PLO, note duplicates some of the material in a0606 
U.S. Ambassador Robert Pelletreau discussed Middle East peace prospects and the Pan American jumbo jet bombing with a PLO representative at a meeting in Tunis over the weekend, the White House said Monday. Deputy White House Press Secretary Roman Popadiuk said the meeting Saturday at the U.S. Embassy was requested by Hakam Balaoui, the Palestine Liberation Organization's representative in Tunis, for the purpose of introducing himself to Pelletreau. ``Discussion centered on Middle East issues,'' Popadiuk said. ``Since the meeting was called by Mr. Balaoui, the ambassador was principally in a listening mode.'' ``The ambassador took the opportunity to mention that the United States would welcome any information the PLO is able to develop concerning the Pan Am tragedy,'' the spokesman said. The White House announcement came hours after President Reagan said that he is sure PLO chairman Yasser Arafat will tell U.S. officials if Arafat has information about the Pan Am bombing. Reagan's comment came in response to a reporter's question as he arrived here to complete a holiday stay which began Dec. 23 and will end Thursday when he returns to Washington. An administration official, speaking on condition he not be identified, said that Balaoui took note of Pelletreau's views during the weekend meeting and told him he would pass them on to Arafat. The official said the discussion did not amount to a request by the United States for PLO assistance, but was in line with the administration's position that it will welcome information from any source that would help to solve the bombing. The administration official said the meeting was not a continuation of the dialogue between U.S. and PLO representatives which began Dec. 16 in Tunis when Pelletreau met with three members of the PLO executive committee. Popadiuk said there are no current plans for a further meeting as part of this dialogue. He declined other comment on a report, attributed to PLO spokesman Hani Faidy in Madrid in an interview with Spanish state radio, that such a meeting was scheduled for Saturday. Popadiuk said President Reagan was aware of the meeting between Pelletreau and Balaoui in Tunis. Reagan spent the New Year's weekend in Palm Springs, where he said in his weekly radio address Saturday that President-elect Bush shares his determination to bring the bombers of the Pan Am plane to justice. Last week, the Kuwaiti newspaper Al-Seyasseh quoted an unidentified PLO official as saying the organization was considering a request by U.S. officials that the PLO help in tracking down those responsible for the bombing. Popadiuk said the White House had received no communication from Arafat. FBI Director William Sessions said on Sunday, in an interview on the NBC television program ``Meet the Press,'' that Arafat has ``a wealth of information'' that could help in the investigation of the Dec. 21 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 that killed 270 people. As Reagan arrived at Los Angeles International Airport after his flight from Palm Springs aboard Air Force One, a reporter called out, ``Arafat says he wants to help find the bomber.'' ``We've not heard from him,'' the president replied. ``We'll be happy to hear from him. If he has anything to tell us, I'm sure he'll tell us.'' The president and first lady Nancy Reagan are staying at the home in the fashionable Bel Air district of Los Angeles where they will live after his term ends Jan. 20. The only public event on their schedule before their return to Washington is a fund-raising dinner Wednesday night on behalf of Mrs. Reagan's campaign against drug abuse. 
William Como, longtime editor of Dance Magazine, the influential journal of the ballet world, has died of lung cancer at the age of 63. Through the magazine, Como championed new dance companies and regional companies, such as Ballet West and the San Francisco, Boston and Tulsa, Okla., ballets, and was an advocate for the critical acceptance of the Stuttgart Ballet in West Germany, the Danish Royal Ballet and Maurice Bejart's companies in France among others. ``And he did the same thing with young dancers and young choreographers, such as John Neumeier, an American choreographer and artistic director of the Hamburg Ballet in West Germany,'' said Norma McLain Stoop, a senior editor of the magazine and a good friend of Como's. Como died Sunday night at Lenox Hill Hospital, Stoop said. He was born in Williamstown, Mass., on Nov. 10, 1925, and he was educated at the American Academy of Dramatic Arts in New York. Como had a brief career as a dancer and actor both in California and New York from 1948 to 1953, before joining the magazine. From 1954 to 1960, Como was sales manager of Dance Magazine, then was promoted to advertising manager and assistant to the publisher from 1961 to 1969. The next year he was named editor in chief, a position he held until his death. Como also edited Ballroom Dance Magazine, which was renamed After Dark, from 1968 to 1979 when it folded. He also had a weekly half-hour show about dance on National Public Radio, Stoop said. Como is survived by a brother, Joseph of Alexandria, Va., and his mother, Janet Como, of Williamstown, Mass. 
Country music entertainer Johnny Cash was scheduled to be released from Baptist Hospital Tuesday, two weeks after undergoing heart bypass surgery, a hospital spokeswoman said Monday. Cash, 56, had suffered some lung problems, but doctors said such complications were not unusual with heart bypass surgery, hospital spokeswoman Aileen Katcher said. The singer's doctors ``last week said the problems were resolving themselves, and I'm certain they wouldn't be releasing him if everything wasn't OK,'' Ms. Katcher said Monday night. Cash had a double heart bypass Dec. 19, one week after his friend and fellow singer Waylon Jennings had triple bypass surgery in the same hospital. Cash is known for his songs ``A Boy Named Sue,'' ``I Walk the Line'' and ``Ring of Fire.'' 
Nicaraguan rebel leaders on Monday told Costa Rican President Oscar Arias they are willing to attend peace talks in Washington with the leftist Nicaraguan government. ``We have the honor of confirming to you, Mr. President, our willingness to reach a political solution to the conflict and that we have decided to accept Washington as the city where negotiations with the Sandinista government should continue,'' the leadership of the Nicaraguan Resistance, the rebels' political organization, told Arias in a letter. Arias is the author of a 1987 peace plan for Central America that calls, in part, for negotiated solutions to civil conflicts in Nicaragua, El Salvador and Guatemala. A tenuous cease-fire agreement between the U.S.-backed Nicaraguan rebels, known as Contras, and the leftist Sandinistas has been in effect since March. Negotiations on a permanent end to the seven-year-old civil war broke down in September. The Sandinistas suggested in September that future talks take place either in Managua, the Nicaraguan capital, or in Washington. The Reagan administration has trained, funded and supplied the rebels since 1981 in their war to overthrow the Sandinistas. The Contras proposed in their letter on Monday that negotiations with the Sandinista government begin Jan. 25 at the Washington headquarters of the Organization of American States. The proposed that OAS Secretary-General Joao Baena Suares, Roman Catholic Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo of Managua and the foreign ministers of the five Central American governments act as witnesses to the talks. The Resistance leaders said they were willing to call an end to rebel military operations in exchange for democratic reforms by the Sandinistas. They also called for effective measures by a verification commission to monitor Sandinista compliance with the peace plan, which provides for democratic guarantees. ``We consider it urgent that viable mechanisms be established to guarantee the independence of the (peace plan) verification commission,'' said the letter, signed by Resistance directors Adolfo Calero, Enrique Bermudez, Roberto Ferrey and Wilfredo Montalvan. The rebel message came after Honduran President Jose Azcona Hoyo confirmed he plans to attend a summit of Central American presidents scheduled for Jan. 15-16 in San Salvador, capital of El Salvador, to advance the stalled peace plan. The summit had been threatened by Nicaraguan claims that Honduras, a key U.S. ally, has been harboring and supporting the Contras. Most Contra fighters fled to Honduras after U.S. military aid expired in February. The International Court of Justice at The Hague, Netherlands, agreed last month to hear a formal Nicaraguan complaint against Honduras over the rebels' presence in that country. The World Court decision prompted Azcona Hoyo to threaten to boycott the summit unless Nicaragua dropped its case. Honduras would also boycott a preparatory meeting of Central American foreign ministers in Managua if Nicaragua didn't withdraw its complaint, he said. In addition, Azcona Hoyo threatened to file a countersuit against Nicaragua before the World Court charging Sandinista army troops with repeated incursions into Honduran territory. But Azcona Hoyo confirmed he would attend the summit during a nationally broadcast New Year's message on Saturday. 
After weeks of delay, a cargo plane loaded with 42 tons of food, blankets and medical supplies for Armenian earthquake victims departed Monday bound for the Soviet republic. On board were two physicians who will evaluate medical conditions there and propose to Armenian authorities the establishment of ``a steady stream of doctors, equipment and drugs going back and forth on a regular basis,'' said Dr. Carolann Najarian of Mount Auburn Hospital in Cambridge. It was the first such airlift from Boston since the Dec. 7 quake that killed an estimated 25,000 people and left 500,000 people homeless. The supplies, donated from all over the United States, have been piling up at Logan International Airport since the day after the quake and nearly filled a large hangar provided by Trans World Airlines as a staging area. Monday's airlift delivered only about a quarter of the supplies. ``In this hangar, we've got $8 (million) to $10 million worth of equipment,'' said Mike Nazarian, east coast chairman of Medical Outreach for Armenia, a relief group. ``We need about two or three more flights.'' Nazarian said he hoped to arrange another airlift for the remainder of the supplies next week. Twelve private relief planes have departed from other cities, said Dikran Kaligian, executive director of the Armenian National Committee. But two weeks ago, before transport could be arranged from Logan, the Soviets called a temporary halt to shipments to Armenia in order to take stock of which supplies were needed, and where, he said. Armenian church and relief officials in the United States, meanwhile, have been reluctant to airlift cargo without sending their own people along to ensure the supplies reach the quake victims for whom they are intended, Kaligian said. Kaligian said he knows of no relief supplies that have gone astray, but the Armenians are taking no chances. ``They could divert it to Moscow, they could take everything,'' he said. ``We've had our personnel on board.'' The cargo plane and crew were provided by Pan Aviation, based in Miami and owned by Armenian-Americans. Medical Outreach paid for fuel and operating costs, Nazarian said. The plane, loaded with bales of blankets, food, tents and medical supplies ranging from antacids to antibiotics, left Logan at about 4:10 p.m. The schedule for the 14-hour trip to the Armenian capital of Yerevan included a stop at Shannon, Ireland, officials said. Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass., Gov. Michael S. Dukakis and his wife, Kitty, Boston Mayor Raymond L. Flynn and state House Speaker George Keverian were at the airport at noon for a news conference on the plane's departure. Dukakis said the supplies being stored in the hangar reflect ``the affection Massachusetts residents have for the people of Armenia.'' The two physicians, Najarian and Dr. Richard Aghababian of the University of Massachusetts at Worcester, said they wanted to set up a microbiology laboratory in Armenia to help test for infectious diseases, which can spread after disasters. Mrs. Dukakis promised to help raise the money for the laboratory if it turns out to be needed. 
A police chief said Monday he will seek homicide charges against two cruise operators and two port guards in the capsize-sinking of a tourist boat that drowned at least 51 people on New Year's Eve. Also Monday, the navy released a report saying that the vessel was inspected twice on the week it sank, including on the day of the sinking. The report conflicted with statements by witnesses who said no attempt was made to control the number of people who boarded the double-deck excursion vessel, Bateau Mouche, and that few life jackets were available. Widely conflicting reports emerged about how many people were on the 100-foot-long boat when it sank and how many may still be missing. The navy said its inspectors examined the boat on Wednesday, finding ``satisfactory safety and navigational conditions'' and ``a number of life jackets above what was necessary.'' A patrol boat intercepted the vessel at 9:30 p.m. Saturday, just over two hours before it capsized, and navy inspectors found ``149 people aboard ... within a permitted capacity of 153,'' the statement said. ``The vessel therefore was given clearance,'' the navy declared, and its Port Authority for Rio had a ``perfectly clear conscience of duty carried out.'' ``Rumors of bribes or negligence'' involving men from the patrol boat who made the last inspection will be investigated, it said. Police Chief Irineu Barroso of Rio's 10th precinct, who is in charge of the case, said Monday he will seek criminal charges against the owner of Itatiaia Turismo, the Rio travel agency that booked the cruise; the owner of the Sol e Mar restaurant that operates the vessel; and two port authority guards who stopped the boat but allowed it to go on its way. Barroso said he will also seek charges of corruption and accepting bribes against the guards. No one has been arrested in the case. ``Survivors ... are telling us that something on board was not right,'' he had said Sunday. Barroso said the Bateau Mouche was overcrowded and questioned why it resumed its trip after the patrol boat turned it back to the dock for inspection Saturday. A representative of the booking agent said the Bateau Mouche usually carried only 100 passengers. Tickets for the New Year's Eve cruise, to watch midnight fireworks off Copacabana Beach, cost $220 each. On Monday, the boat remained under 65 feet of water off Sugar Loaf Mountain, a Rio landmark near downtown. Rescuers said they may find more bodies but that most of the people who drowned probably were accounted for. ``We think that most of the bodies already have been taken out,'' said Lt. Pedro Paulo Albuquerque of the fire department maritime division, whose divers were inspecting the wreck. He added, however, that ``we ... may see some bodies washing up on Rio's beaches in the next couple of days.'' TV Globo, Brazil's largest commercial network, carried reports of 30 bodies trapped in the boat's banquet room. It did not give the source of the reports. Col. Jefferson Cardoso de Bem, head of the fire department maritime division, said in response: ``Our divers still do not have sufficient visibility to see what's inside (the room.) There are piles of tables and chairs in the way. The work is going very slowly.'' Survivors told journalists Sunday no effort was made to control the number of people boarding. They said few life jackets were available and life preservers were tied to the railing. They confirmed the forced return for the passenger count and said the craft went back out a few minutes later. Cid Castor of Itatiaia Turismo told The Associated Press 100 tickets normally were sold for twice-daily sightseeing excursions on the Bateau Mouche. Confusion persisted about how many on the New Year's Eve cruise were passengers, crewmen, waiters, members of the samba band or others. Castor said Itatiaia's excursion director drowned in the sinking and ``the passenger list went down with him.'' Sergio Rodrigues, a lawyer for the Sol e Mar restaurant, said an incomplete reservation list showed 106 passengers, eight band members, five waiters, one head waiter, the pilot and three crewmen. Gustavo Blanco, a spokesman for the Sol e Mar, produced an incomplete list Sunday with 131 names, but said it did not include people accompanying those with reservations and ``we don't know how many were on board.'' 
The man who said he killed Amazon ecologist Francisco Mendes will undergo a lie detector test to clear up contradictions in his statements about the shooting, the Justice Ministry said Monday. Deputy Justice Minister Luis Fernando Eichenberg told The Associated Press that investigators have questions about the events that preceded the Dec. 22 shooting. Mendes was shot as he stepped from his home in the Amazon jungle city of Xapuri, 2,660 miles northwest of Rio de Janeiro. Darcy Alves Pereira da Silva, 21, the son of a local cattle rancher, said last Tuesday he killed Mendes, the president of the local Rubber Tappers Union. Mendes challenged local ranchers, who wanted to clear Amazon land for cattle grazing. But Eichenberg said, ``If he (Pereira da Silva) did shoot Mendes, he didn't act alone. The lie detector test can help us eliminate doubts.'' Police said earlier that Pereira da Silva might be acting as a cover for his father, Darly Alves da Silva, who Mendes had said threatened to kill him. Pereira da Silva and his brother Oloci, 22, are being held in police custody, but their father and their uncle, Alvarino Alves da Silva, are in hiding, possibly in Bolivia, according to press reports. ``That the Alves brothers may be hiding in Bolivia is a hypothesis we are examining. If confirmed, we will begin extradition procedings,'' Eichenberg said. Mendes received the United Nations Global 500 award for his ecological work to preserve the Amazon forest. Ecologists say an area the size of Belgium is burned and chopped down each year in the jungle region that covers more than two-thirds of Brazilian territory. Ecologists say the reduction in tropical forest lands has contributed to the elevation of the Earth's temperature, which may have been a factor in the devastating drought in the U.S. Midwest this past summer. Mendes' death has drawn world attention to the old problem of land conflicts between landless peasant farmers and right-wing cattle ranchers. Since 1980, more than 1,000 peasants, ecologists and church leaders, who defend the peasants, have been killed in battles over land ownership in Brazil. 
``Wheel of Fortune'' host Pat Sajak and hip comic Arsenio Hall say they won't try to dethrone the giants when they debut their own late-night talk shows. Instead, they will try to reach new audiences. ``I think people place too much emphasis on the competition. I'm running my own race,'' said Hall, whose syndicated ``The Arsenio Hall Show'' airs Tuesday. ``It's a personal best, it's me against me.'' Hall and Sajak, whose CBS show debuts Monday, may have an uphill battle establishing themselves in a field already glutted with flashy _ even bizarre _ personalities. But their shows will have subtle differences from the current fare and each other. Sajak, for instance, will have a desk. Hall won't. Sajak, who usually wears a pocket handkerchief on the ``Wheel of Fortune,'' will abandon it at night, said coordinating producer David Williger. Hall will tend to stylish suits. CBS spent more than $4 million to build a new sound stage and other facilities for Sajak's 90-minute show, which will rely on the traditional format pioneered by Jack Paar. However, it will be spiced by live interviews with Los Angeles locals _ everything from punk rockers to melon merchants. Sajak said he also considered having a female sidekick, but opted instead for Dan Miller. Viewers familiar with his game-show role with letter-turner Vanna White might be upset, ``as though Vanna and I had gotten a divorce or something,'' Sajak said. Hall, who was guest host on Fox's ``Late Show,'' said he will try to create an air of spontaneity on his hour-long show and plans to avoid relying on guests with youth appeal. ``I'd love to talk to Ronald Reagan,'' he said. ``There isn't anyone who I would consider too old and square.'' 
One man sought in the fatal shooting of a sheriff's deputy was arrested Monday, and a second was found dead after apparently committing suicide in a cabin where he had holed up, authorities said. The man arrested in connection with the New Year's Eve shooting of Navajo County Deputy Bob Varner was tentatively identified as Raul Lopez. The second man, tentatively identified as Douglas Savory, 45, was found dead of a gunshot wound to the face after police fired tear gas into the cabin near Winslow, a state Department of Public Safety spokesman said. Earlier Monday, the man had fired at officers and a law enforcement helicopter and apparently killed himself afterward, DPS spokesman Sgt. Allan Schmidt said. A 33-mile stretch of Interstate 40 was closed for about six hours, forcing drivers to make a 167-mile detour onto lesser routes to the north, because the cabin was less than a quarter-mile from the interstate. After the tear gas was fired, officers ``entered (the cabin) with orders to shoot to kill,'' said Navajo County Sheriff Gary Butler. ``Mr. Savory was an extremely dangerous man,'' Butler said. ``Every time we had contact with him, he turned on us. He shot Officer Varner before he even had a chance to react. He turned on two of our cars while we were trying to pursue him. Every time that we made contact with him, I ended up with several bullet holes in my patrol cars.'' The owner of the cabin called police Monday morning after he went there ``and recognized that something was amiss,'' Schmidt said. A California warrant accused Savory of robbery and kidnapping in a September gun-store robbery in which five other people have been arrested, Schmidt said. Savory also has been investigated in connection with manufacturing and sale of illegal weapons and explosives, and ``is well known to authorities at the (California) state and federal level,'' Schmidt said Sunday. Lopez, he said, ``may be a citizen of Mexico but we have very little on his background.'' Lopez, who was unarmed, was arrested without resistance in Holbrook after an officer recognized him, police Lt. Ken Moore said. Lopez was turned over to sheriff's deputies for questioning, Moore said. Chief Deputy Arleigh Richmond said Lopez would be treated at a Flagstaff hospital for frostbite to his feet and then returned to Holbrook, possibly on Tuesday, to be booked. Richmond said it had not been determined what charges would be filed against Lopez. Varner, 51, was shot three times Saturday night after he stopped a car with two suspects. He died at a Phoenix hospital early Monday. The suspects, one of whom said he was a survivalist, later tied up a couple with telephone cord at their home. The men took the couple's car and fired on a second patrol vehicle; after a short chase, the two wrecked the car and fled on foot, Schmidt said. 
The racially divided town of Keysville held its first locally supervised election since the 1930s on Monday, re-electing the mayor and voting in her all-black council slate. Joseph Cochran, the 67-year-old white challenger to Mayor Emma Gresham, said he wasn't surprised by the results after a ruling earlier Monday by the Burke County Board of Registrars against challenges he had filed against 84 black voters. Mrs. Gresham got 127 votes, while Cochran got 61. In the council races, Mrs. Gresham's slate won all five seats by similar margins. The ballots were counted Monday night after the county registrars denied two challenges filed by Cochran, said Gayle Korotkin, an attorney for Christic Institute South, a nonprofit foundation that helped fight the challenges. Cochran had contended that the 84 voters he challenged did not live within the east Georgia town's boundaries. Thirty-five of the 84 live in a section that was annexed by the town last year. ``Since the town's boundaries have not been established, I can't see hardly how you can annex more property into it,'' Cochran said. Alan Gregory, another attorney for Christic Institute South, said the annexation was precleared by the U.S. Justice Department and approved by the Georgia secretary of state's office. In addition to the 35 voters living in the annexed area, ``they're challenging the same 49 people that were challenged in the last election,'' Gregory said. ``Those were nullified by the registrar at the end of the vote tallies. There is no reason for those people to be challenged again.'' Cochran, whose council slate included four whites and one black, said Monday night he would consult with his attorney before deciding whether to appeal the registrars' decision. The town is about 70 percent black and has about 230 registered voters. Keysville's government was revived in January when Mrs. Gresham and a slate of council members were elected to one-year terms. Monday's election, conducted under the town's original 1890 charter, was for 20-month terms. If the Legislature approves a new charter, subsequent elections will be for four-year terms. For reasons lost to time, Keysville deactivated its government in 1933. In the 1980s, black residents tried to reactivate it to get water, sewers, fire and police protection, all of which the town lacked. There were problems defining boundaries, however, since the original charter described the city limits as everything within a half-mile radius of a schoolhouse demolished about 1895. White residents went to court to block the move to revive Keysville's government. They denied they were worried about a possible black government and said their concern was that installing municipal services would tax poor blacks out of their homes. Mrs. Gresham and a council were elected the first time in 1985, but white residents' contention that the town limits were not defined was upheld in court and the vote was thrown out. The state court issued an order forbidding the Keysville officials from taking office. Those opposed to reactivating the government used the same argument to try to prevent elections last year, but ultimately lost in federal court. 
The bodies of six servicemen, victims of the explosion of a Pan Am jumbo jet over Scotland, arrived at Dover Air Force Base at sunset Monday. At Boston's Logan International Airport, the sisters of another victim, Thomas Walker, 47, of Quincy, Mass., were waiting when his body arrived Monday. ``It's like a nightmare and it just goes on and on,'' said Sally MacKinlay of Rockland, watching families greet passengers arriving on the flight from London that brought the remains of her brother home. All 259 people aboard Pan Am Flight 103 on Dec. 21 were killed when a bomb exploded while the jet was over Scotland, en route from London to New York. At Dover Air Force Base, the largest mortuary operated by the military, the bodies of an Air Force sergeant and five Army personnel arrived aboard a military aircraft that was also transporting explosives. Air Force officials said it is not unusual for bodies and explosives to be transported on the same plane. The body of Air Force Sgt. Edgar H. Eggleston, 24, of Glens Falls, N.Y. was removed by the Air Force honor guard. Eggleston, stationed at Ramstein Air Base, West Germany, was coming home to visit his ill stepmother. The remaining bodies were removed from the plane by members of the Old Guard, an Army honor guard, stationed in Washington, D.C. The bodies included that of Maj. Charles D. Mckee, of Trafford, Pa. He had been an assistant attache for military affairs at the U.S. Embassy in Beirut, Lebanon, but never told his family or friends. Officials identified the other victims as: Sgt. Philip V. Bergstrom, of Forrest Lake, Minn.; Capt. Joseph P. Curry, 31, of Fort Devons, Mass.; Spec. Kenneth J. Gibson, of Romulus, Mich.; and Army Sgt. First Class Lloyd D. Ludlow, 41, of Pittsburg, Kansas. Ludlow and Gibson were stationed in Germany. Curry, assigned to the 10th Special Forces Group at Fort Devens in Ayer, Mass., was attending a conference in Europe and was on his way home. 
A ferry overloaded with New Year's travelers sank off the Caribbean coast after it ran out of fuel, leaving 67 people drowned and 14 missing, authorities said Monday. They said 46 people survived. The ferry Justo Rufino Barrios II sank Sunday in Amatique Bay, said Capt. Anibal Giron Arreola, second-in-command at the Puerto Barrios naval base. He said the 22-year-old captain, Juan Pablo Ezquibel, was arrested after authorities determined that 120 people were aboard the 30-ton ferry, although the manifest listed 40. The vessel was authorized to carry 90 people, he reported. Navy divers found no bodies inside the wreck, he said. Giron Arreola said the ferry ran out of fuel midway on a 16-mile run across the bay from Livingston to Puerto Barrios, and sank after a naval patrol boat tried to tow it to port. Juan Jose Gaytan, a reporter at Radio Portena in Puerto Barrios, said authorities who interviewed survivors believe the crew failed to take adequate precautions while preparing to be towed. Giron Arreola said passengers ran to one side of the ferry while it was under tow and the ferry sank. The Spanish Embassy in Guatemala City said a 40-year-old Spaniard, Vicente Daudi, was among the dead. It said his wife, Rosa Maria Arnal, and a son survived, but two daughters were missing. Daudi was working with a Spanish technical aid and economic development mission in Guatemala, the embassy said. A morgue official said 13 bodies were identified. Aside from Daudi, the nationalities of victims were not known. Navy patrol boats, fishing vessels and other private craft searched for the missing Monday. Puerto Barrios, 187 miles northeast of Guatemala City, the capital, is Guatemala's main east coast port. There are no roads to Livingston and most travel along the coast is by boat. 
Philippine Airlines on Tuesday identified four people authorities say are members of a radical Palestinian faction planning to hijack or blow up an Asian airliner this month. Rollie Estabillio, spokesman for the airline, said the four are believed to be members of a breakaway Palestine Liberation Organization faction led by Abu Musa, who is supported by Syria and Libya. Estabillio said the names were provided in a telex sent by authorities at Tokyo's Narita International Airport last month. The message prompted increased security at Asian airports in the wake of the Dec. 21 bombing of a Pan Am jetliner over Scotland, in which 270 people were killed. He identified them as Mudh Zaman Bakar, Muhen al-Barani, Mustafa al-Burani and Ahmed Yasar and said they were believed to be carrying passports from India, Pakistan and Oman. He said officials at Manila's Ninoy Aquino International Airport were carefully screening all passengers from South Asia and the Middle East in view of the alert. Abu Musa, whose real name is Said Musa, broke with PLO chief Yasser Arafat in 1983 because of opposition to peace moves with Israel and his anger over Arafat's failure to stop the Israeli 1982 invasion of Lebanon. Last week, Asian aviation officials said they were warned by Air-India of a possible attack on an Asian aircraft by Jan. 10. Air-India refused comment, but sources in New Delhi said security was increased at airports in New Delhi, Calcutta, Bombay and Madras. Similar measures were ordered at airports in Hong Kong, Tokyo, Taipei, Manila, Dhaka, Bangladesh and Colombo, Sri Lanka. On Monday, the Philippines deported a Syrian who was held at Manila airport after Australia refused to accept him because it suspected he was linked to a terrorist group, officials said. Immigration authorities said two security men shepherded Vartan Bakerjian onto a Philippine Air Lines flight bound for Bangkok, the capital of Thailand. Immigration official Ruben Domingo said Bakerjian left Bangkok on Dec. 27 for Sydney, Australia, by way of Manila. Australian authorities sent him back to the Philippines, and he was detained in Manila on Saturday. Domingo said Australian authorities told Manila that Bakerjian tore up a Greek passport which he used when entering the Philippines and switched to a U.S. passport when he arrived in Sydney. ``When the guy was interrogated, the Australians came to the conclusion he might be a suspected terrorist,'' Domingo said. Bakerjian denied being a member of an extremist group, Domingo said, but he added that the Philippines decided to play it safe _ ``especially with recent reports that some action would be taken against Asian airlines by Middle East terrorists.'' 
The 12-foot wall of water that gushed from a 300-foot-gap in a southern Utah dike was down to a trickle by Monday and residents cleaned up mud and debris from the flooded 50 homes and 100 apartments. No injuries were reported from the Quail Creek Reservoir break early Sunday that resulted in the evacuation of an estimated 1,500 along the Virgin River. The dike failure, which also ruined four bridges and closed sections of area highways most of Sunday, prompted Gov. Norm Bangerter to declare Washington County an emergency disaster area. Bangerter's declaration was necessary to open disaster relief coffers. A similar designation by the state Federal Emergency Management Agency office is expected later this week, said County Emergency Services Director Tony Hafen. FEMA would reimburse up to 75 percent of the losses, with the remainder covered by state and local governments, Hafen said. Teams of local, state and federal engineers and other emergency service officials fanned out Monday to assess the damage in an effort to put a price tag on the dike break and help residents recoup their losses. The St. George suburb of Bloomington, 300 miles south of Salt Lake City, was hardest hit, with up to 40 homes flooded. Bangerter said the $3 million dike, part of a reservoir and dam project 14 miles east of St. George, will be rebuilt. After the dike gave way early Sunday, authorities ordered the evacuation of 1,500 people living along the Virgin River. The haste with which the evacuation was carried out angered some residents who said they may have saved more property had they not been so rushed. Evacuations were ordered just after midnight but the water did not reach their homes until well after 3 a.m. ``We could have gotten a lot of stuff out if we had been given a more realistic time,'' said Myron Nelson, whose Bloomington apartment was flooded. ``We got the TV and the sewing machine out but there was a lot more we probably could have taken with us had we known.'' 
French and British broadcast reports said Monday that 17 trapped survivors of the Dec. 7 earthquake in Soviet Armenia were found in a wrecked bread factory after living for three weeks on grain and melted snow. The report could not be immediately confirmed. The official Soviet news agency Tass, which has provided copious news on the rescue efforts, made no mention of the report. In Paris, Europe 1 radio quoted a nurse for the French humanitarian group Doctors of the World saying the 17 survivors were found in a bread factory near Spitak, a village in northwestern Armenia that was virtually destroyed. The nurse was quoted as saying they stayed alive by eating grain and drinking melted snow. The nurse recently told a journalist at the station that the survivors were apparently found Wednesday, 21 days after the quake, and the report reached Yerevan on Saturday. The station had an earlier version of the report quoting the nurse as saying they were found Saturday. The male nurse spoke to Europe 1 on condition of anonymity. The London commercial radio station LBC reported that French medics said the 17 were found Saturday, 24 days after the quake rocked northwestern Armenia. It also said they stayed alive by eating grain and drinking melted snow. It was not immediately possible to resolve the discrepancy over when the survivors were found. The radio reports gave no details on the conditions of the survivors or where they are now. The Associated Press was unable to reach by phone several regional government officials, relief groups, and press organizations in Yerevan, the Armenian capital. One official at the republic's Interior Ministry said he knew of a smaller group of survivors found Dec. 24 or 26, but he had no details and it was not known if he was talking about the same group. The quake killed an estimated 25,000 people in Soviet Armenia and left about 400,000 homeless. It severely damaged Leninakan, a city of about 250,000 near Spitak. Armenia's Deputy Prime Minister, Vardkes Artsruny, said Dec. 23 that authorities were calling off the search because they did not expect to find more survivors. He said efforts would focus on rebuilding the southern republic. In the weeks after the quake, rescuers from the Soviet Union and abroad used dogs, heavy equipment, and often their own hands to pick through the wreckage in search of survivors. In many cases, they were guided by cries for help that sprang up from countless wrecked buildings. The relief efforts provided many dramatic tales of human endurance and resourcefulness. In one case, a woman trapped in her basement for eight days helped keep her 3-year-old alive by pricking her own fingers and letting the child suck her blood, a Soviet doctor said. Some people have sat in front of bulldozers to prevent the clearing of debris until it could be searched for survivors. Authorities wanted to bulldoze the rubble and spread quicklime to prevent the spread of disease from the corpses. The quake, which measured 6.9 on the Richter scale, was centered 25 miles north of Leninaken. 
President Fidel Castro, celebrating the 30th anniversary of his revolution, rejected market-oriented economic reforms and said that for Cuba, it is ``socialism or death.'' Castro's remarks, in a televised speech Sunday night, seemed aimed at the Soviet Union and other Communist countries that have been abandoning strict adherence to Marxist doctrine. ``Today we say with more force than ever, socialism or death, Marxism -Leninism or death,'' he said. Castro spoke to a large gathering from the balcony of the municipal building in the eastern city of Santiago, where he had proclaimed victory for his revolutionary struggle on Jan. 1, 1959. 
Federal regulators rescued a post-Depression record 217 savings institutions in 1988, leaving Congress and President-elect Bush to figure out the best way to pay the $38 billion bill. Theoretically, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, which regulates the S&amp;L industry, expects enough income over the next 30 years _ $45 billion to $50 billion _ to cover the cost. But analysts and many members of Congress say regulators have run up such a huge bill that turning to the taxpayer is inevitable. ``We still don't know the magnitude of the S&amp;L crisis,'' Senate Republican Leader Bob Dole of Kansas said Sunday. ``We're not even certain what the regulators have been doing the past week, running up a tab of some $40 billion.'' 
Ringing in the new year are dozens of changes in federal laws and regulations, many of them aimed at quenching Americans' thirst for security and a few that will make life a little more expensive. Among the most significant of the Jan. 1 changes are a vast expansion of Medicare to cover catastrophic illnesses, faster pension fund vesting that will benefit millions, particularly women, and tax changes reducing the government's subsidizing of purchases on credit. Others that occurred just before the end of 1988 or are scheduled early in 1989 include a ban on lie detector tests by private employers, 60 days advance notice of plant closings and large layoffs and a new law prohibiting landlords from discriminating against the handicapped and families with children. 
FBI Director William Sessions says Yasser Arafat, chairman of the PLO, has ``a wealth of information'' that could help in the investigation of last month's crash of Pan American World Airways Flight 103 in Scotland. Sessions said he would welcome any information Arafat might have, but with or without the PLO's help the FBI chief predicted Sunday ``we're set up for the long haul'' and prepared for a lengthy manhunt. Appearing on ABC's ``This Week with David Brinkley'' and on NBC's ``Meet the Press,'' Sessions said he is ``very optimistic'' the culprit of the Dec. 21 bombing that killed 270 people will be found. ``We have a pattern and reputation for being able to solve'' such crimes, he said. 
A Palestinian held by Greece and wanted by the United States for the 1982 bombing of a Pan Am jetliner may hold clues to the group that blew up Flight 103 over Scotland last month. Whether he will ever tell his story in a U.S. court is an open question. Greece's Supreme Court has twice delayed the extradition of Mohammed Rashid, 39, who is thought by Western intelligence experts to specialize in the planting of bombs aboard jetliners and to be a senior operative in the May 15 Palestinian terrorist group. The Rashid case has taken on extra significance since the Dec. 21 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, which killed all 259 people aboard the Boeing 747 and about a dozen on the ground. 
A woman celebrating her birthday with her husband broke into hysteria after returning home to find that a fire had destroyed their wooden house, killing 10 people, including their four children. Firefighters had to restrain Nancy Watson when she repeatedly tried to enter the burned out two-story house, said Valerie Pound, a witness. ``There was no house to get back into. It was just gone,'' Pound said. ``She kept screaming the names of her four kids in a pattern, one right after another.'' Three walls and the roof already had collapsed when firefighters arrived early Sunday, said Fire Chief Leo Renn. 
Police blamed overcrowding for the capsizing of a boat packed with revelers planning to watch a New Year's fireworks display off Copacabana Beach. At least 51 died and others were missing today. Passengers said the double-decked cruise boat had ignored a coast guard order to return to port, and officials said the flat-bottomed craft _ built to hold 100 people _ was overcrowded and unfit for Saturday night's choppy seas. It capsized in 65 feet of water about a mile from shore, and strong currents kept rescue workers from searching the site for bodies early today. Survivors said few life jackets were accessible when the 100-foot Bateau Mouche went down, and one, Plinio Donadio, said, ``I watched my wife die because I couldn't untie one of the life preservers to save her.'' 
Mike has lived twice as long as might have been expected when doctors diagnosed his AIDS. Dan Turner and Cristofer Shihar had one chance in five of seeing 1984. They don't know why they've survived what has been a death sentence for more than 45,000 Americans, but say it may be a matter of attitude. ``A lot of people don't die of the disease, they die because they give up,'' said Mike, a 34-year-old Chicagoan who was diagnosed with acquired immune deficienty syndrome in January 1984. He asked that his last name be withheld. According to Judith Wiker, a Chicago holistic therapist who says she has counseled hundreds of clients with AIDS or AIDS-related problems, Mike is one of many people with the disease who are well enough to feel and act normal. ``There are a lot of healthy people running around with AIDS,'' she said. Scientists are trying to determine just why some people have survived as long as 10 years with AIDS. The federal Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta is studying 119 people known to have lived with it for three or more years. ``Is the virus somehow different?'' asks Ann M. Hardy, a CDC epidemiologist now at the National Center for Health Statistics in Hyattsville, Md. ``Is it something in their immune system?'' Does survival time hinge on the mildness or severity of the infections that attack people with AIDS? Or could the key really be a ``lifestyle-psychosocial type of thing'' _ a positive attitude and emotional support? All of these possibilities are now being studied, either by the CDC or in studies funded by the National Institutes of Health. For the purposes of the CDC's 2-year-old study, long-term survivors were defined as people who lived at least three years after being diagnosed. Unlike the estimated hundreds of thousands of Americans who are infected with the AIDS virus but do not have symptoms, long-term survivors actually have battled one or more ailments that define acquired immune deficiency syndrome _ including Kaposi's sarcoma, pneumonia, damaged immune systems and severe weight loss. Most long-term survivors are white homosexual men in their 30s whose main or only symptom is Kaposi's sarcoma, the skin cancer that was rare before AIDS became an epidemic, CDC data indicates. ``The major issue people are interested in is what way the immune response for the long-term survivor is different than in the short-term survivor,'' said Dr. Henry Masur, deputy chief of critical care medicine at the the Clinical Center of the NIH in Bethesda, Md. ``With any disease, whether it's cancer or pneumonia, in a healthy person, some people get sick very quickly and die and other people survive much longer. With breast cancer or colon cancer, some people will be dead within a few months and some people will go for 30 years,'' Masur said. For Mike, an accountant, three years of chemotherapy kept the skin sores of Kaposi's sarcoma at bay. He then began treatment with the drug AZT, now called zidovudine, which prolongs the lives of many with AIDS. Mike, who considers himself ``fairly lucky,'' said his only current health problem is mild leg pain. ``I'm basically as normal as they get. Nobody would know, if they saw me on the street, that I had been diagnosed with AIDS.'' Turner, 42, of San Francisco, was diagnosed with Kaposi's in February 1982, before most Americans _ including doctors _ had heard of AIDS. ``I do believe one can live with AIDS and strike up a bargain and co-exist with the virus, as we do with other viruses,'' said Turner. He underwent chemotherapy, a year of acupuncture, took megadoses of Vitamin C for a while, has taken zidovudine intermittently since early 1988 and still gets alpha-interferon, a genetically engineered anti-cancer drug. ``I go to the gym regularly, and I try to maintain my weight and my energy level,'' said Turner, who writes and performs music. ``A friend and I have just finished writing a movie script, which we hope to sell.'' Shihar, 38, of Los Angeles, was diagnosed with Kaposi's in November 1982, and said he's done ``just about the opposite of all the recommended treatments'' but his illness went into remission anyway. ``I would love to say it was all very spiritual, but I was in remission before I became spiritual,'' said Shihar, who works for Northern Lights Alternatives, a New York-based education and support organization for people with AIDS. ``I think the one thing I hear from people I know who have survived is they're real stubborn.'' Ms. Wiker believes ``there is a certain kind of person that is a survivor with AIDS. That kind of personality is one that starts living in the moment, a person that is letting go of their past feelings and fears ... and they're letting go of future projections about death.'' That theory is being tested in a federally funded study at the New York State Psychiatric Institute, where 450 people infected with the AIDS virus are being tracked for five years to determine whether their emotional state influences their resistance to the illness. ``Most people would like to believe they have control over this, and if they remain optimistic and cheerful it will help,'' said Dr. Jack M. Gorman, associate professor of clinical psychiatry at Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons and principal investigator in the study. ``And we certainly want to encourage people to remain optimistic and cheerful, but we don't really know if it makes a difference or not, and that's what we're trying to see,'' he added. Regardless of psychological factors, survival prospects continually improve in newly diagnosed AIDS cases, thanks to drug treatments such as zidovudine and an aerosol form of pentamidine, a medication that fights the rare type of pneumonia that has been highly fatal to AIDS patients. As recently as two years ago, 80 percent of people with AIDS were expected to die within 24 months, but that has changed dramatically, said Dr. Nathaniel Pier, a New York City physician with a large number of AIDS patients. The CDC says it can't currently estimate AIDS victims' average survival. ``As of November 1988, we can assist somebody to stay alive and healthy for two years, with the current therapy,'' Piers said. ``And a great deal may occur in two years. We've seen an enormous change from 1986 to 1988. ``Many people being diagnosed now may benefit from breakthroughs that will totally change the surface of the disease.'' 
Clarisse, a calf with an electric heart, is one sign that political fighting over federal funding hasn't stopped researchers trying to develop a permanent replacement for as many as 400 diseased hearts a year. Clarisse got her heart Dec. 8, about eight months after the National Institutes of Health decided to suspend $20 million in contracts for research on a permanent artificial heart _ and six months after the NIH reversed itself. Dr. Claude Lenfant, director of the National Hearth, Lung and Blood Institute _ a part of the NIH _ questioned in May whether more than a decade of research would lead to a permanent heart that the body wouldn't reject. Under pressure from members of Congress, Lenfant said in July that the contracts would not be suspended. The five groups funded are Hershey Medical Center of Pennsylvania State University; the University of Utah; Abiomed Inc. of Danvers, Mass., working with the Texas Heart Institute of Houston; and Nimbus Co. of Rancho Cordova, Calif., working with the Cleveland Clinic. ``Clearly, there is controversy in the medical community over whether or not the artificial heart is the right device,'' Sen. John Heinz, R-Pa., said recently. ``If funding is cut off now, we will never know if the artificial heart was the right answer.'' Researchers at Penn State and Utah have been working since the mid-1970s on electrical versions of the air-driven, or pneumatic, heart first implanted in Seattle dentist Barney Clark in December 1982 at the University of Utah. Recipients of air-driven hearts remain mostly bedridden in hospitals, linked by tubes to large compressors, unless they get human heart transplants. Recipients of the electric heart will be able to walk, exercise and even work. ``The advantage of these hearts is that you'll be able to put everything inside the patient's chest except the battery,'' said Gerson Rosenberg, assistant chief of Penn State's division of artifical organs. ``Nobody is ever saying that this is going to be as good as a natural heart, that this patient is going to forget he's got it and go on to live a normal life. That's not true,'' Rosenberg said. Because the devices must meet specific requirements _ such as pumping eight liters of blood a minute _ designs are similar at all five research facilities. The Penn State device, which has the size and heft of a squared softball, has a 10-pound, rechargeable battery pack on a waist belt. A battery in the heart will let a recipient take off the external battery for up to 45 minutes. The device, designed to last about five years, probably will cost about the $80,000 to $100,000 that a heart transplant costs, Rosenberg said. Hershey began testing its electric models in animals in 1983. One implanted Jan. 8, 1983, in a calf named ``E.T.'' _ short for ``Electric Total'' _ enabled the animal to live 222 days _ a record on any electric artificial heart. Since then, the device has grown smaller _ closer in size to a human heart _ as researchers make use of advancements in a miniaturized electronics. Rosenberg said he expects human tests to begin in the late 1990s. Researchers had hoped to start the trials in the early 1990s, but scaling down the electronics proved more difficult than expected. Despite the delays in perfecting a permanent heart, there have been benefits from the research, including better knowledge of drugs to prevent heart disease or strokes, improved design on commonly used artificial heart valves, and better techniques and materials for use in cardiac bypass surgery. Rosenberg said the progress that's been made against heart disease is unlikely to eliminate the need for artificial heart research. ``I don't think anything would please the people working on the artificial heart more than to hear that something was discovered to prevent all that,'' he said. ``But I doubt that that will happen.'' 
Samuel Gruber wants to change the perception of sharks as prehistoric, and says the ocean-going killing machines have a complex immune system that could become an ``antibody factory'' for humans. Gruber, a University of Miami biological oceanographer, has been intrigued with sharks since an underwater encounter with a hammerhead in 1958. ``After 30 years of studying them, the most astonishing thing I've found about sharks is that they are so sophisticated. They have so many systems that are in higher animals, that if you didn't know better, you'd think that _ like the whales _ they evolved on land and went back to the sea.'' Gruber studies the lemon shark, unique because it can survive while motionless in the water, making observation easier. Among the oddities he has observed are its eyes _ which differ among various sharks _ its reproductive system and its ``highly generalized but extremely powerful'' immune system. Sharks' eyes are unusual because some can close like a human's and others are covered by a transparent nictitating membrane, Gruber said. ``That's just totally unheard of in fish. Sharks have eyes more or less like a cat's, with split pupils. It certainly cannot be explained.'' The reproductive system more closely resembles a mammal's than a fish's. The lemon shark takes up to 15 years to reach sexual maturity, then gives live birth to a dozen pups every other year. While fish lay thousands of eggs, the shark gives birth complete with placenta and umbilical cord. Only three of the dozen pups are likely to survive two years, which has profound implications for human treatment of sharks, which many people still see as a dangerous pest or, at best, a source of meat, Gruber said. ``You want to exploit that resource, but you want it renewable. While a pair of salmon can lay 10,000 eggs and reproduce its entire species, sharks and whales can only have a very low number of young after a very, very long period of time.'' That means they are surprisingly fragile as a species; traps off South Africa have virtually eliminated sharks in only a few years. That would have a disastrous effect on many other species, Gruber said. Sharks are predators, and essential to evolution by eliminating weaker members of species. But humans might have even more reason to mourn the loss of sharks. Products from sharks' immune system have shown promise in treating diseases, he said. ``They are not only able to make antibodies, they already have antibodies to many disease that they would never see or get, such as human smallpox. Why this is I don't know.'' When attacked by a disease, sharks generate huge amounts of antibodies, making them a potential factory for helping humans fight diseases like AIDS or cancer, he said. ``If we could keep a number of sharks and raise antibodies, then each person could have his own shark, his own antibody factory.'' There is evidence of cancer-fighting potential in the shark's skeleton, Gruber said. ``Researchers were actually able to isolate a protein that when injected into the tumor would cause it to dry up and die.'' Side effects make such treatment impractical for humans, but Gruber is interested because he suffers from a cancer of the lymph system that causes his joints to swell. He goes regularly to California for an experimental treatment that involves injections of rat antibodies. Despite cancer and occasional accidents including a mangled hand, nearly drowning and having a shark almost tear his leg off, Gruber said he intends to continue his underwater research. ``We owe it to the world to study something like the shark. And you can't do it from the top of a hill with field glasses.'' 
Mike has lived twice as long as might have been expected when doctors diagnosed his AIDS. Dan Turner and Cristofer Shihar had one chance in five of seeing 1984. They don't know why they've survived what has been a death sentence for more than 45,000 Americans, but say it may be a matter of attitude. ``A lot of people don't die of the disease, they die because they give up,'' said Mike, a 34-year-old Chicago accountant diagnosed with AIDS in January 1984. He asked that his last name be withheld. According to Judith Wiker, a Chicago holistic therapist who says she has counseled hundreds of clients with AIDS or AIDS-related problems, Mike is one of many people with the disease who are well enough to feel and act normal. Scientists are trying to determine just why some people have survived as long as 10 years with AIDS. The federal Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta is studying 119 people known to have lived with it for three or more years. The National Institutes of Health is funding other research. For the purposes of the CDC's 2-year-old study, long-term survivors were defined as people who lived at least three years after being diagnosed. Unlike the estimated hundreds of thousands of Americans who are infected with the AIDS virus but do not have symptoms, long-term AIDS survivors actually have battled one or more ailments that define AIDS _ including Kaposi's sarcoma, pneumonia, damaged immune systems and severe weight loss. Most are white homosexual men in their 30s whose main or only symptom is Kaposi's, the skin cancer that was rare before AIDS became an epidemic. For Mike, an accountant, three years of chemotherapy kept the skin sores of Kaposi's sarcoma at bay. He then began treatment with the drug AZT, now called zidovudine, which prolongs the lives of many with AIDS. Turner, 42, of San Francisco, was diagnosed with Kaposi's in February 1982, before most Americans had heard of AIDS. He underwent chemotherapy, a year of acupuncture, megadoses of Vitamin C, has taken zidovudine intermittently and still gets alpha-interferon, a genetically engineered anti-cancer drug. ``I think the one thing I hear from people I know who have survived is they're real stubborn,'' said Shihar, 38, who was diagnosed with Kaposi's in November 1982 and who works for Northern Lights Alternatives, a New York-based education and support organization for people with AIDS. Regardless of psychological factors, survival prospects continually improve in newly diagnosed cases. Even two years ago, 80 percent of people with AIDS were expected to die within 24 months, said Dr. Nathaniel Pier, a New York physician with a large number of AIDS patients. 
Clarisse, a calf with an electric heart, is one sign that political fighting over federal funding hasn't stopped researchers trying to develop a permanent replacement for as many as 400 diseased hearts a year. Clarisse got her heart Dec. 8, about eight months after the National Institutes of Health decided to suspend $20 million in contracts for research on a permanent artificial heart _ and six months after the NIH reversed itself. Dr. Claude Lenfant, director of the National Hearth, Lung and Blood Institute _ a part of the NIH _ questioned in May whether more than a decade of research would lead to a permanent heart that the body wouldn't reject. Under pressure from members of Congress, Lenfant said in July that the contracts would not be suspended. The five groups funded are Hershey Medical Center of Pennsylvania State University; the University of Utah; Abiomed Inc. of Danvers, Mass., working with the Texas Heart Institute of Houston; and Nimbus Co. of Rancho Cordova, Calif., working with the Cleveland Clinic. Researchers at Penn State and Utah have been working since the mid-1970s on electrical versions of the air-driven, or pneumatic, heart first implanted in Seattle dentist Barney Clark in December 1982 at the University of Utah. Recipients of air-driven hearts remain mostly bedridden in hospitals, linked by tubes to large compressors, unless they get human heart transplants. Recipients of the electric heart will be able to walk, exercise and even work. ``The advantage of these hearts is that you'll be able to put everything inside the patient's chest except the battery,'' said Gerson Rosenberg, assistant chief of Penn State's division of artifical organs. Because the devices must meet specific requirements, designs are similar. The Penn State device, which has the size and heft of a squared softball, has a 10-pound, rechargeable battery pack on a waist belt. A battery in the heart will let a recipient take off the external battery for up to 45 minutes. The device, designed to last about five years, probably will cost about the $80,000 to $100,000 that a heart transplant costs, Rosenberg said. 
Samuel Gruber wants to change the perception of sharks as prehistoric, and says the ocean-going killing machines have a complex immune system that could become an ``antibody factory'' for humans. Gruber, a University of Miami biological oceanographer, has been intrigued with sharks since an underwater encounter with a hammerhead in 1958. ``After 30 years of studying them, the most astonishing thing I've found about sharks is that they are so sophisticated. They have so many systems that are in higher animals, that if you didn't know better, you'd think that _ like the whales _ they evolved on land and went back to the sea.'' Gruber studies the lemon shark, unique because it can survive while motionless in the water, making observation easier. Among the oddities he has observed are its ``highly generalized but extremely powerful'' immune system. Products from shark immune systems have shown promise in treating diseases, including cancer, he said. ``They are not only able to make antibodies, they already have antibodies to many disease that they would never see or get, such as human smallpox.'' When attacked by a disease, sharks generate huge amounts of antibodies, making them a potential factory for helping humans fight diseases like AIDS or cancer, he said. ``If we could keep a number of sharks and raise antibodies, then each person could have his own shark, his own antibody factory.'' 
Scientists looking for ways to provide food, oxygen and sewage treatment for space travelers are growing wheat in a computer-controlled capsule that mimics Earth's ecosystem. The Kennedy Space Center scientists cultivated their garden by hand for about three years in the 12-by-23-foot ``biomass production chamber,'' and then turned it over in mid-November to a computer. The computer makes sure that the wheat, growing hydroponically, gets enough light, air, water and fertilizer. ``If you're truly, permanently going to space, you've got to have a system like this,'' says plant physiologist William Knott, head of the project. Without such a system, Knott says, astronauts would need regular shipments of fresh air, potable water and prepared food _ prohibitively expensive for any planned space habitats and impossible for voyaging spaceships. ``Sooner or later, we're going to get tired of sending TV dinners out and bringing port-a-potties back,'' said agricultural engineer John Sager. One problem is trying to cram enough of the important parts of the biosphere into a container small enough to fit in a spaceship, said Ralph Prince, another agricultural engineer. ``In the physical world, if you model a dam on the Tennessee River, you build everything smaller. When we model the biological process ... we can't build people smaller.'' A life support system in flight might carry several staple crops such as wheat, rice, beans, soy, potatoes, peanuts and lettuce, and might carry only 25 gallons of water. Astronauts would have to recycle water to stretch the supply. Another obstacle is converting sewage into a fertilizer that won't kill the plants, which thrive on a carefully blended chemical solution. A prototype life support system could be ready for a ground test by 1995, but it could be 2020 before a system would be available for flight testing, say National Aeronautics and Space Administration scientists. 
Women may be only a button away from controlling the severity of their labor pains during childbirth, according to a North Carolina researcher who studied a self-administered pain-killing technique. The technique, patient-controlled epidural analgesia, lets a woman control the amount of pain medication she gets. Patients who used it tended to use less than those who got medication from a doctor or nurse, said Steven Z. Lysak, who directed a study of 74 women at Wake Forest University Medical Center. In addition to potentially limiting fetal exposure to anesthesia, the self-administered technique provides a psychological advantage by increasing patient participation in the labor process, researchers said. ``Using this technique, women safely and effectively treated their own pain throughout the course of labor,'' said Lysak, who presented his findings last year at the annual meeting of the American Society of Anesthesiologists. Patients who use the technique push a button to administer a measured dose of a pain-relieving medication. A thin tube inserted near the patient's spinal cord in the lower back carries medication to nerves and receptors. The device has a timer to prevent a patient from overdosing herself. 
A biomedical engineer and an anesthesiologist are working on a high-tech version of the stethoscope, with three sound pickups instead of the single amplifier doctors use to chill their patients. The multichannel electronic stethoscope designed by Daniel Benson and Jeffrey Joseph improves the doctor's ability to hear and monitor the supply of oxygen to a patient's lungs during surgery, and lets the anesthesiologist hear the heart and changes in breathing sounds from each lung. The sound is amplified, filtered, mixed and transmitted to a headset worn by the anesthesiologist, who can isolate each channel or hear all three. It can help determine if an oxygen tube has shifted or is inserted incorrectly, or if a lung has collapsed, said Joseph, an anesthesiologist at Chestnut Hill Hospital. ``By using the multichannel stethoscope and comparing the sounds, you can recognize problems that much faster. ``You can localize even a slight wheeze by turning up the volume and come up with a good diagnosis.'' Joseph and Benson, of Thomas Jefferson University, have applied for a patent for their version of the device first invented in 1819 by Renee Laennec, a French physician. The Patent Office says 324 patents for stethoscopes have been issued in the United States, including 102 electronic versions and 173 with special acoustic properties. 
Do your ears hurt when your jetliner starts descending for a landing? Here are some tips from the nation's ear, nose and throat doctors to relieve the discomfort: _Pop your ears to equalize the pressure. Pinch your nostrils, take in a mouthful of air and, with your mouth closed, use your cheek and throat muscles to force the air into the back of your nose ``as if you were trying to blow your fingers off your nose. When you feel a pop in your ears, you may have succeeded,'' said Dr. Robert Schindler of the American Academy of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery. If necessary, repeat the procedure several times, but stop if it hurts. _Try swallowing and yawning to activate the muscle that opens the Eustachian tube connecting the back of the throat with the middle ear. Chewing gum or letting mints melt in your mouth will help you swallow more often. _Avoid sleeping during descent. You may not swallow enough to keep up with pressure changes if you are asleep. _If you have allergies, take antihistamines at the start of the flight or a decongestent pill or nose spray an hour or so before descent. Schindler said the medications will help your ears pop more easily, but they shouldn't be used by people with heart disease, high blood pressure, irregular heart rhythms, thyroid disease or excessive nervousness. If your ears fail to open or pain persists after landing, you may need to consult your ear doctor, he said. 
Consumers' confidence about the state of the economy increased in December, boosted by low inflation, low unemployment and growth in personal income, a business-financed research organization reported. The Conference Board's Consumer Confidence Index increased to 119.8, up nearly 7 points from November, the board said in a report for release Tuesday. The index had declined in November to 113.1 from October's figure of 116.9. People interviewed for the survey were particularly positive about the current economic situation, the board said, with this component of the confidence index reaching its highest point since the boom years of the late 1960s. The monthly survey of 5,000 U.S. households is conducted for the board by National Family Opinion Inc. of Toledo, Ohio. ``The consumer's very favorable assessment of prevailing conditions reflects the continued vigor of the economy and bodes well for the immediate future,'' said Fabian Linden, executive director of the board's Consumer Research Center. ``Unemployment is at its lowest level in many years, personal income continues to grow, and the inflation rate is virtually imperceptible to the average shopper,'' he said in a statement. ``All these factors contribute to a high level of confidence. ``Still, there is some uncertainty about the future, with the policies of the new administration on such major issues as the federal budget and the foreign trade deficits still unknown,'' he added. Buying plans among those surveyed remained at roughly the same level for the past few months, the board said. About 7 percent of respondents said they plan to purchase a car within six months, 3.5 percent intend to buy a home in the period, and nearly 29 percent plan to buy a major appliance. 
A wealth of job opportunities is luring tens of thousands of South and Southeast Asians to Japan, forcing this once isolated nation to cope with the problem of migrant labor. More than half the foreigners working at companies investigated by the Labor Ministry between Oct. 16 and Nov. 16 were found to be working illegally, a recent report showed. Poor working conditions and the risk of deportation haven't discouraged the wave of workers from less wealthy Asian nations, nor have wages that are low by Japanese standards although, because of the strong yen, high in the foreign workers' own countries. The Japanese government, so far, has responded to the surge in foreign labor with plans to open its doors wider to foreign professionals. But it has reaffirmed a ban on manual laborers, provoking a national debate over the merits of internationalizing Japan's closed society. While government and private groups study the problem, the influx of illegal foreign workers continues to grow. In 1987, the Labor Ministry deported 11,307 foreigners for working illegally. In the first half of this year, Japanese police and immigration authorities arrested 7,196 foreigners for working illegally, up from 5,802 in the first half of 1987. But those numbers compare with police estimates that about 70,000 illegal foreign workers are in Japan. About half the illegal workers are men. Women, often recruited by crime syndicates, long have flocked to Japan to work, often legally, as ``entertainers.'' Human rights groups say the gangs that control Japan's underworld often force them into working as prostitutes. Since 1985, however, the number of illegal male workers in Japan has ballooned as unskilled workers from the Philippines, Bangladesh and Pakistan find ready employment, Labor Ministry figures show. In the ministry's investigation, of 202 foreigners working at 15,796 companies, 111 were working illegally, Kyodo News Service reported. It said 54 of the illegal workers were from Bangladesh, 36 from Pakistan, 13 from India, two each from Ghana, Taiwan and Thailand and one each from the Philippines and South Korea. Most of the clandestine laborers worked long hours with no vacations for low wages, having overstayed tourist visas after finding work at construction sites or in small metal working, chemical or food processing factories, the report said. Despite the government ban, firms that hire foreign manual workers are not penalized. A shortage of Japanese willing to do manual labor encourages them to employ foreigners, who often are reluctant to complain of poor treatment due to the risk of deportation, said Eiko Shinotsuka, a labor economist at Ochanomizu University in Tokyo. Both men and women working illegally are vulnerable to exploitation because of their illegal status, said Yaeko Takeoka, a lawyer familiar with the problems of clandestine workers. Japanese employees in the metal working industry receive average hourly wages of 2,150 yen, or about $17.20. Clandestine workers receive hourly wages of 500 to 700 yen, or $4 to $5.60, Labor Ministry figures show. But a few months of even low wages in Japanese yen amount to a fortune for migrant workers due to the lower cost of living in other Asian countries. Japan's average per capita income is about $17,000, compared with $550 in the Philippines, $113 in Bangladesh and $360 in Pakistan. By living together in small apartments to save on expenses, the clandestine workers manage to send about half their wages home to their families. Isolated in a society where they must constantly hide from police and immigration officials, few plan to stay in Japan indefinitely. ``They just come for short stays,'' Shinotsuka said. Economists say the influx of illegal laborers is unlikely to abate because Japan's 2.4 percent unemployment rate reflects a trend toward shortages of workers in certain industries. A recent report by the National Council for Development of an Economic Structure of the 21st Century predicted that Japan will face a shortage of 2.7 million workers by the year 2000 if current economic trends continue. The council recommended that Japan accept unskilled and semi-skilled foreign workers and suggested establishment of a system to prevent exploitation of ``guest workers.'' Numerous commentaries also have urged that Japan welcome its less affluent neighbors. ``In Japan, we don't accept political asylum and we turn our backs on immigrants. Maybe, in the short run, this is a wise policy in avoiding problems. However, can we say this policy is right over the long run?'' wrote commentator Yunosuke Ohkura in The Japan Times. Noting that Japanese believe they are ``unique and therefore superior,'' Mitsunobu Sugiyama of the University of Tokyo said in a recent article in the Japan Quarterly that ``constant contact with the people of other nations on this very personal level would do much to open Japanese eyes and help them better understand the rest of the world.'' A recent report by a Labor Ministry advisory panel, however, concluded that foreign manual laborers were undesirable. Their unfamiliarity with Japanese language and customs, it said, could cause social conflict. 
Eastern Airlines, smaller and deeper in debt than a year ago, begins 1989 facing federal mediation considered crucial to what the carrier will look like a year from now _ if it still exists. ``We simply cannot survive if the National Mediation Board persists in holding Eastern hostage as it has been doing,'' wrote Tom Matthews, Eastern's senior vice president for human resources, in a Dec. 28 letter to Walter C. Wallace, chairman of the mediation board. Wallace will participate in Jan. 6 mediation at an undisclosed location between Eastern and its Machinists union. The mediation sessions, with no deadline set by the federal board, are aimed at settling a 16-month-old contract dispute that has been before the board for a year. Failure to reach agreement could lead to the mediation board's declaration of an impasse. That would trigger a 30-day cooling-off period, after which the union could strike and Eastern could impose its own work conditions. While some union leaders suspect the hard-line Texas Air Corp. ownership would like a strike so that it could try to break the strike and bust the union, the struggling airline might not last through disruptions and much more negative publicity. Eastern ended the year with new public questions about its safety after an emergency landing Dec. 26 in Charleston, W.Va. of an Eastern flight with a hole in its fuselage. There were no injuries and company officials say Eastern has one of the industry's best safety records. But the incident came after Eastern earlier in the year went through a comprehensive Federal Aviation Administration probe and Department of Transportation scrutiny. Those studies said Eastern was safe, but its unusually bad labor-management relations could threaten safety. Executives of Eastern's pilots union will meet early this month to discuss their contract talks, begun about six months ago, with management. The pilots are also hopeful the National Mediation Board, which has set final briefs for early February, will agree with them that Eastern and its Texas Air sister, Continental Airlines, are being run as a single carrier. A single-carrier ruling could lead to unionization of Continental, to which Texas Air has transferred some Eastern assets because of its non-union status, the pilots union says. Eastern officials say Continental is run separately from Eastern. The pilots haven't said whether they would honor a Machinists strike. Since Machinists negotiations began, Eastern has laid off 7,233 employees, or about a fifth of its workforce, and lost $319 million, the company says. It has been lobbying ardently for declaration of an impasse, bringing the 30-day deadline the company says will force movement in the negotiations. Eastern reported $233.7 million in losses for the first three quarters of 1988, and its loss for the past decade totals $1.3 billion. Management and its largest union, the 8,500-worker Machinists, are $200 million apart in their latest contract offers. But besides money, there are important philosophical differences between the two sides. Machinists District 100 President Charles E. Bryan firmly believes workers should have a major role in company decision-making. His dream has been an employee-owned Eastern. The management of Eastern, bought nearly three years ago by Houston-based Texas Air, has been more interested in slashing the wages of the non-mechanics in the Machinists union. Mechanics comprise about half the union, but the management says it must cut baggage handler and other non-mechanic wages. Some baggage handlers, for example, woud have hourly wages cut over three years from $15.60 to $10. Mechanics, who comprise about half the union, would be cut only by small amounts. Union officials have described the company offer as a divide-and-conquer strategy to split the union between mechanics and the other workers. Eastern management also points out that Machinists refused to take the 20 percent salary cuts agreed to by its pilots and flight attendants unions in February 1986 in an effort to stave off bankruptcy or the sale to Texas Air. Machinists leaders say Eastern employees are being told to suffer even more for bad management that isn't committed to keeping Eastern alive. The unions say Texas Air chairman Frank Lorenzo is stripping away Eastern's assets and will abandon a carcass. The $365 million sale of Eastern's profitable Northeast shuttle service to New York developer Donald Trump and the earlier spinoff of Eastern's computer reservations system to Texas Air are cited to support that argument. Planes and gates have also been sold, and Eastern reportedly has been offering other assets such as Canadian routes. Eastern says it needs cash infusions to keep operating. Bryan, who portrays his union's resistance to Lorenzo as a virtual holy war, has sought a ``white knight'' to rescue Eastern employees and allow them to take over the airline. But the only reported serious talks last year about buying Eastern were with TWA chairman Carl Icahn, who wanted steep union concessions. In a Nov. 9 letter to Bryan, Lorenzo, who hadn't deigned to communicate directly with Bryan until recent months, said the contract negotiations were the most realistic way to help the airline. ``Time is running against Eastern,'' Lorenzo wrote. 
The nation's economy closed 1988 with vigorous growth, with December posting the biggest increase in the rates of production and new orders for goods since July, according to a survey of corporate purchasing executives released Tuesday. ``December exited like a lion,'' said Robert J. Bretz, chairman of the National Association of Purchasing Management's Business Survey Committee. ``The continued robust growth capped the final quarter at what could be the strongest growth rate of the year. ``Except for a solid downtrend in the rate of inflation, there were few signs of the anticipated slowing in this, the seventh year of the recovery,'' added Bretz, who is director of materials management at Pitney Bowes Inc. The group's Purchasing Managers' Index increased to 58.1 percent in December, compared with 56.6 percent in November. The December figure was the highest since July's 59 percent. A reading above 50 percent indicates that the economy is generally expanding; below 50, that it is generally declining. The group's seasonally adjusted production index advanced to 61.3 percent, compared with 58.2 percent in November. It was the highest since July's 62.7 percent, according to the monthly survey of purchasing executives in more than 250 industrial companies. The index of new orders rose to 60.1 percent, up from 58 percent in November, and the highest since 62.1 percent in July. The employment growth rate index slowed only slightly in December to 57.5 percent. Except for November's 57.9 percent, it was at its highest level since December 1987. New export orders increased at the highest rate since July after growing at a slower rate for the four previous months, the survey found. Of those members of the trade group who export, 30 percent reported higher export orders, up from 22 percent in November. The 6 percent who indicated lower export orders was down from 8 percent in November. Vendor deliveries, which indicate whether companies are receiving orders faster than they can deliver them, contined to slow in December, to 54 percent compared with November's 52.1 percent, reflecting the seasonally strong growth in production, the association said. Inventories also increased, but at a lesser rate than in November. The seasonally adjusted inventory index was 51.4 percent in December, compared with November's 52.6 percent. This suggests that some modest inventory buildup may have occurred to hedge against announced Jan. 1 price increases and to alleviate shortages in some commodities, the group said. The growth rate in prices was lower for the sixth consecutive month and was at its lowest level since May 1987, the survey found, confirming a solid decline in inflation since midyear. In another survey last month, a majority of the group's members said they believed the economy would do better this year than in 1988, with continued growth and slower inflation. 
The folks at Clemons Boot Co. would like to stick to making standard-sized boots to sell off the shelf, but loggers and cowboys keep walking through the door after cutting off a toe or breaking a leg. ``One of the first guys who came to us had a brace that fit on the inside of a boot,'' said Walt Clemons, the patriarch of the family business. ``He couldn't find a store-bought boot to fit him.'' ``A little while ago we made a caulked boot for a guy with a walking cast,'' said Clemons' son, Bill. ``He was self-employed and said he had to get back to work. ``We'd really kind of like to phase that out. But that's our bread and butter. People keep us so busy (with custom work) we can't really do that.'' The Clemons family _ Walt, his wife, Anita; their son, Bill, and his wife, Theresa _ specializes in making caulked boots and packers. Caulked (pronounced corked) boots have high lace-up tops and spikes _ known as caulks (corks) _ on the soles. They are favored by loggers for sure footing on logs, rocks and steep hillsides. Packers are lace-up cowboy boots that offer pointed toes and tall heels to fit a stirrup while riding a horse and ankle support while walking on the ground. With Anita cutting out the leather pieces, Theresa sewing them together, Walt forming the uppers over the last and Bill finishing them off with soles, the Clemons family turns out three pairs of boots a day. Although Clemons sells through a few retail outlets in Oregon and Washington and have filled an order that came out of the blue from Horsehead, N.Y., they are a small outfit and like it that way. ``We're small enough that we don't have people coming in and telling us what we can and can't do,'' says Anita. ``The caulked boot business is such a limited market that the Japanese and the other countries are not interested,'' says Bill. ``If you were talking dress loafers, we couldn't compete.'' The $225 they charge for a pair of standard-sized caulked boots is competitive with mass-produced boots. It's $50 extra for a custom fit. The Clemons family once tried to boost production by hiring some help, but it didn't work out. ``People don't care the way we care,'' Anita said. ``They're used to getting mill wages and we couldn't pay it.'' Disdaining cardboard, they put steel shanks and stiff nylon heel counters in the caulked boots to make them more rugged. The foot part of the boot is sewn on with the smooth skin side of the leather on the inside to make them tougher still. ``If the skin side is out you can cut that on a rock the first day and it won't hold grease,'' to keep the water out, Bill said. They rely on satisfied customers to get the word out. ``We've only advertised two times,'' Bill said. Packers with red tops and black bottoms were all the rage for awhile among working cowboys. ``The buckeroos don't make much money, but what little they do make they put into their gear,'' says Walt. ``You ride the range all day and a good-looking boot can be something to talk about.'' 
Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. Inc. took the No. 1 spot in domestic securities underwriting in 1988, ending the five-year reign of Salomon Brothers Inc. in that position, according to a company that follows the industry. Merrill Lynch's total underwritings for the year were $39.7 billion, or 14.5 percent of the $273 billion overall total brought to market in 1988, according to a report Friday from IDD Information Services. Second overall was Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co., with $36.9 billion, while Salomon Brothers Inc. _ which held the top spot for the previous five years _ slipped to third place at $33.9 billion, IDD said. Merrill Lynch took first place in three equity-related securities categories _ common stock, preferred stock and convertible debt rankings. Merrill Lynch managed nearly $5 billion of the $29.6 billion in common stock offerings, while Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. was second at $4.7 billion and Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. was third with $3.3 billion. Merrill Lynch was also first in preferred stock underwriting at $2.5 billion, which was more than a third of the market, and in convertible debt underwriting, managing about $1 billion of the $3.1 billion total. Goldman Sachs took first place in straight-debt issues, with $34 billion out of a $233 billion market, IDD said. Salomon Brothers slipped to second place with $32 billion, and Merrill Lynch was third with $31 billion. Goldman Sachs also was first in mortgage-backed debt underwriting at $17 billion while Salomon Brothers managed $13 billion, according to IDD. Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. underwrote $11.9 billion, or 43 percent, of the market in new junk bonds, the high-risk, high-yield debt offerings. In distant second was First Boston with $3.9 billion, while Morgan Stanley Group Inc. had $3.1 billion for third place. Eurobond offerings increased by 28 percent from 1987 to $180 billion, IDD said. Nomura Securities International repeated in the top spot with $17.5 billion, followed by Credit Suisse First Boston with $14.4 billion and Deutsche Bank at $12.1 billion. Nomura also took the No. 1 position in international equity offerings, with $1 billion, IDD said. 
Venezuela, which has a foreign debt of about $33 billion, will initiate a new round of refinancing talks with its Bank Advisory Committee within two weeks, the government said. Finance Minister Hector Hurtado and Finance Vice-Minister Eglee Iturbe de Blanco notified advisory committee chairman Chase Manhattan Bank that a negotiating team will arrive in New York ``in the first half of January.'' Hurtado's message was sent Dec. 31 and published in local newspapers Monday. President Jaime Lusinchi announced the reopening of talks on much of Venezuela's $33 billion debt in his annual New Year's address. Venezuela is Latin America's fourth largest debtor. Lusinchi also declared a moratorium on principal payments of foreign commercial bank debt, most of which is included in a $20.34 billion refinancing pact signed in 1986 and modified in 1987. The moratorium, which begins Jan. 17, initially affects some $700 million due during 1989 under the existing pact, plus some commercial bank debt not included in the pact. Venezuela has already paid nearly $1.5 billion in principal refinanced in the $20.34 billion agreement. The moratorium does not include principal payment of debts to multilateral or official financial institutions, foreign currency-denominated public bonds, trade credits or loans acquired after 1983, Hurtado said in the message to the banks. Interest payments are also not affected. Talks are likely to be concluded during the administration of President-elect Carlos Andres Perez, who will be inaugurated Feb. 2. Perez advisers say they want to stretch the current 14-year refinancing pact to 25 years and reduce net yearly debt payments to no more than $1.5 billion. Perez plans to travel Tuesday to Mexico for informal talks on the foreign debt and other regional issues with Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortari, Perez' office said Monday. The Venezuelan president-elect is promoting a common Latin American framework for debt talks which would link debt to trade and reduce payments. In 1988, Venezuela paid about $5 billion in public and private debt service, or half of its total estimated foreign exchange income of $10.1 billion. 
Iraq has cut oil exports by 90,000 barrels a day in accordance with its new OPEC production quota of 2.64 million barrels a day, the official Iraqi News Agency reported Monday. The agency, monitored in Cyprus, said that as of Jan. 1 Iraq had stopped trucking 65,000 barrels a day to Jordan's Red Sea port of Aqaba and another 25,000 barrels a day through Turkey. Meanwhile, King Fahd of Saudi Arabia on Monday launched a multi-billion deficit budget for fiscal 1989 with a warning that Saudi Arabia would not be bound by OPEC-fixed oil production quotas if others violated them. Iraq currently exports 1.5 million barrels a day through a pipeline across Turkey to Mediterranean ports, and another 500,000 barrels a day through a pipeline across Saudi Arabia to the Red Sea port of Yanbu, the agency said. Iraq's quota, matching that of Iran, was set by the 13-member Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries at a cartel meeting in Vienna in November. Previously Iran had a cap of 2.4 million barrels a day, compared to 1.5 million barrels a day for Iraq, which was heavily exceeding its quota. The former gulf war enemies badly need increased oil revenues in order to rebuild economies shattered by 8 years of hostilities. In Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, the official Saudi Press Agency said budget outlays for the world's biggest oil-exporting nation were approved at a weekly cabinet session chaired by King Fahd. Expenditures were set at 141 million riyals, or about $37.6 billion, against projected revenues of 116 billion riyals, or $30.9 billion. That left a deficit of 25 billion riyals, or $6.7 billion, down from 35.9 billion riyals for 1988, to be covered by public borrowing, the agency said. Budget deficits have become a chronic problem in Saudi Arabia and other oil-producing nations since crude prices started slipping in the early 1980s because of a world glut. The new restrictive OPEC quota system took effect on Sunday in a fresh attempt to remedy the situation. King Fahd stressed the importance of ``discipline and adherence'' to the quotas if prices are to improve. He warned that although Saudi Arabia is ``the first state to abide by what OPEC agrees to... I don't think that anyone can blame the kingdom if the contract is broken.'' ``We do not want to see that to happen under any circumstances and it is hoped that the losses suffered by the OPEC states give an idea of what can result from a chaos, as happened a few years ago and again a year ago,'' he added. 
Texaco Inc. and the Saudi Arabian Oil Co. said Monday they had begun their previously-disclosed joint venture to refine and market petroleum in the United States. The partnership, known as Star Enterprises, began operation on Sunday, the first day of the year, the companies said in a statement. The partnership will refine, distribute and market petroleum products under the Texaco trademark in 23 East and Gulf Coast states and the District of Columbia. It also has the right to buy up to 600,000 barrels per day of Arabian crude oil at prevailing market prices. The companies announced their plans for the venture on June 16 and signed a definitive agreement on Nov. 10. The agreement called for Texaco to receive $812 million for a 50 percent interest in its refining assets and marketing system in 23 states. The oil company based in White Plains, N.Y., said it expects to enjoy an additional $1 billion in cash benefits and savings resulting from the joint venture. It provides Saudi Arabia, the world's biggest oil exporter, with a secure outlet for its products while virtually guaranteeing Texaco a steady stream of crude at market prices. 
Economists will tell you they make their prognostications on the basis of ``the data,'' not gut feelings about the economy. But some attending last week's conference here of the American Economic Association were bold enough to venture guesses on the fate of the economy without their usual battery of numbers at hand. Yes, there were scores of seminars during the conference on such esoteric topics as ``Empirical Analysis of Price Determinants'' (and we wonder why Johnny can't understand simple rules of economics). But there was also a fair amount of cocktail and luncheon chatter about what economists might call ``exogenous'' _ or outside _ factors affecting the ebb and flow of the economy. Principal among them, politics _ George Bush's politics, to be more precise. Theories about how the president-elect will manage the economy span the usual spectrum, as you might expect. Yet a predominantly hopeful theory is emerging in some quarters, based on Bush's transition performance. While some pundits have criticized his recently announced Cabinet selections as bland, others are impressed by the mix of key holdovers from the Reagan administration and new choices aimed at mending fences with old opponents. So far, these optimists say, Bush has done several things right. When the markets reacted negatively in the days following his election, he moved swiftly to name his ``economic team,'' long before settling on advisers for defense and other areas. Among his earliest choices was Nicholas Brady to remain as treasury secretary, a pick that was applauded by those who admired Brady's work as head of the Reagan committee investigating the October 1987 stock market crash. Having James A. Baker III, a former treasury secretary and an architect of past accords to stabilize the dollar in world markets, as secretary of state also was seen as a plus by some economic experts. Later additions that have drawn praise are Michael Boskin of Stanford University to chief economic adviser, Clayton Yeutter to agriculture secretary, Robert Mosbacher to commerce secretary and Elizabeth Dole to head the Labor Department. The Dole move was viewed as especially significant since it not only installed an experienced hand at the wheel of labor, but also helped smooth the ruffled feathers of the secretary-designate's husband, Senate minority leader Robert Dole, R-Kan. Other rough spots in the road that Bush quickly patched were in Massachusetts. He initiated a meeting with his defeated challenger, Michael Dukakis, and also offered to make ex-House Speaker Tip O'Neill the next ambassador to Ireland. Neither of the high-profile Democrats will end up serving the new administration, but Bush's thoughtful gestures weren't lost on the loyal opposition. The optimists say Bush's style may help him make strides on Capitol Hill, where Democratic cooperation will be crucial to keeping his pledge of no new taxes. One economist at last week's conference, James Smith of the University of North Carolina, said he predicts a great ``Rose Garden compromise'' along about April that will put a two-year federal budget in place, restrain the deficit and maybe even avoid new taxes. That certainly would provide the so-called ``soft landing'' the economy needs to avert recession in 1989. Non-believers would say such fine-tuning went out a long time ago, about the time Paul Volcker used sky-high interest rates to squelch inflation. Still, the prospect of striking a delicate balance in economic policy, between bust and boom, is intriguing _ particularly now, a few weeks before the inauguration when hope springs eternal. 
Libya has secretly started producing limited quantities of chemical weapons at a plant near Tripoli and has conducted trial runs of its production equipment, U.S. officials said Tuesday. Libya claims the facility manufactures pharmaceuticals, not chemical weapons. Until now, U.S. officials said Libya was on the verge of producing lethal gases but had not actually begun doing so. ``They have conducted test runs and have some limited production,'' said one official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. A similar indication was given by State Department spokesman Charles Redman, who said that if foreign companies withheld further technical help from the Libyan chemical weapons facility, ``Libya would find it difficult to begin full production, and would not be able to sustain limited CW production.'' He declined to elaborate. ABC-TV, quoting unnamed intelligence sources, reported Tuesday night that Libya has been moving material out of the plant in recent days, perhaps to clear away evidence before an international inspection. There was a spill of toxic chemicals at the plant during an operational test run last summer, the Washington Post reported in Wednesday's editions. The newspaper quoted unnamed sources as saying that few details were known about the spill. The escalation of the U.S. campaign against Libya appears designed to bolster the American position at an upcoming international conference on chemical weapons scheduled to begin Jan. 7 in Paris. The U.S. delegation, led by Secretary of State George P. Shultz, plans to press participants to withhold help from Libya for the facility. Attention has been focused on the facility near Rabtha, about 50 miles southwest of Tripoli, after President Reagan told an interviewer last month that a military attack on the plant had been discussed and added: ``That's a decision that has not been made yet.'' A statement by the official JANA news agency on Tuesday accused the United States of lying about the plant as an excuse to attack Libya and kill its leader, Col. Moammar Gadhafi. The movement of a U.S. carrier group toward the Mediterranean on Tuesday in what the Pentagon said was a normal rotation of forces prompted speculation in Italy of an impending strike. In Los Angeles, Bob Hall, an assistant White House press secretary accompanying President Reagan on a California vacation, declined comment on the reports other than to say, ``We have nothing new on the subject.'' Dan Howard, the Pentagon's chief spokesman, also declined to discuss the reports but denied that the carrier movement was tied to the situation in Libya. ``It's a standard deployment,'' Howard said. The United States said it has shown West Germany, Italy, Japan and other allies convincing proof that the newly built facility is producing chemical weapons. Italian, Japanese and West German companies were involved in the construction of several plants in the complex housing the alleged chemical weapons facility. Japan has told the United States its companies were helping build a nearby metallurgical plant, but U.S. officials say that plant makes canisters. ``Big, big metal canisters,'' said one official. ``What are they for, for pills?'' added the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. He indicated the canisters were intended for use in conjunction with the chemical weapons. But a spokesman for the West German government said authorities there ``had no indication or evidence to verify the American suspicions'' that German companies were involved in the construction of a chemical weapons plant. Nonetheless, West German officials announced they were examining the records of one chemical company doing business in the complex, Imhausen-Chemie. ``We are confident that the West German government is taking the information we have provided very seriously, and is investigating fully,'' Redman said. The United States, along with at least 20 other countries, also produce chemical weapons. But Redman said that in Libya's case ``it does happen to be in the hands of a particularly irresponsible government.'' U.S. officials are concerned Libya make give the weapons to one of its surrogate terrorist groups. The administration of President-elect Bush is expected to revive the moribund international talks in Geneva on a global ban of chemical weapons use. 
A Vietnam veteran whose plans for a Vietnam War forest memorial were threatened by a bank foreclosure sale was bailed out by a flurry of last-minute donations Tuesday, his supporters said. ``This has been a long, long effort, but we did reach our goal,'' said Terry Thompson, a Vietnam veterans' activist from Dayton, Ohio, who has led a nationwide fund-raising campaign to help save the project. The Veterans National Living Memorial, which Geoffrey Steiner has planted with more than 30,000 trees since 1980, was scheduled for a foreclosure sale Wednesday at 10 a.m. The 100-acre tract near Cushing was being taken by the Randall State Bank, which holds a mortgage on it. Steiner, 39, who received national publicity for his efforts, was slated to lose the property after failing to repay a loan from the bank. He secured the loan $8,000 loan with the property in 1984 to buy a car for his wife. The bank initiated foreclosure proceedings last fall to recover $5,424 still outstanding, and scheduled the foreclosure sale. Thompson said Adolph Coors Co. and Minnesota Coors distributors will pay about 80 percent of the nearly $6,896 needed for Steiner's debts, legal fees and taxes. The Golden, Colo., brewer is a major supporter of veterans affairs and one-third of its employees are veterans, she said. The remainder of the money will come from smaller donors, she said. Thompson says she's already talked with Brigid Fitzgerald, an attorney was handling the foreclosure. She said she and Steiner will meet Fitzgerald Wednesday with the money and Fitzgerald then will cancel the sale. Fitzgerald said earlier that Steiner could stop the auction by paying his outstanding debt, plus legal and advertising costs incurred by the bank. Thompson read about the foreclosure proceedings in November in a Dayton newspaper and launched a fund-raising campaign through her hometown chapter of Vietnam Veterans of America. Since arriving in Little Falls on Monday night, she has been on the phone with veterans' groups across the nation, seeking to raise the funds needed to redeem the property. She said replies have been slow because chapters have had to convene their executive boards to approve donations. But she said she is confident the money can be raised. Thompson said they planned to plant a tree Wednesday for Jason Rother, the Minnesota marine who died after being left stranded in a California desert when his outfit pulled out during a training mission. Newsweek magazine cited Steiner as one of 50 American heroes in July 1987. He has said his goal is to plant a tree for each of the approximately 58,000 U.S. soldiers killed in the Vietnam War. 
Cuban President Fidel Castro has pledged the U.S. Catholic Conference he will free the remaining 225 prisoners the Havana government has recognized as political, the Washington Post said in its Wednesday editions. The group of prisoners include 44 the Cuban government has previously described as too dangerous to release from jail, the paper said, citing an unidentified senior Cuban official and western diplomats. The Catholic conference has been pressing since 1985 for the prisoners' release, the diplomats were quoted as saying. Of the 476 prisoners on the government's roster of those who have faced political charges, about 225 remain in jail. Some 250 were released during 1988. The political prisoners the government has acknowledged include those named in a list of about 450 presented to Cuba in May 1988 by Cardinal John O'Connor of New York City, according to the Post. During the summer, Castro said that everyone on that list would be freed except 44, whom he described as too dangerous. The government has not admitted that anyone else among its approximately 30,000 prisoners is being held on political charges. Castro says now he will free the 44 prisoners he originally rejected, on the condition they be granted visas to travel immediatly to the United States, the Post said a high-ranking Communist Party official confirmed. Among those to be liberated are the last four of 64 plantados, prisoners who refused on principle to participate in rehabilitation programs or in some cases to wear jail uniforms, the Post said. Some have been jailed since the first years after the 1959 revolution. However, the Post said, it remained unclear whether all of the prisoners would be eligible to go to the United States. At least 24 released last year were denied visas because of criminal histories, according to a list drawn up by Elizardo Sanchez, head of the Cuban Commission for Human Rights and National Reconciliation. 
The writer, a diplomatic correspondent based in Washington, has visited Cuba 15 times since 1974. 
Fidel Castro's revolution has eradicated much U.S. influence from Cuba, but certain vestiges defy 30 years of Communist rule. Thousands of pre-revolutionary era American cars, for example, still negotiate the roads. Washington imposed a trade embargo in 1960. Cubans hang on to their rundown Fords and Chevies because later model Russian-made Ladas are only available to a limited number of Cubans. Castro says widespread use of private cars is a luxury Cuba cannot afford. Thus, antiquated as they are, U.S.-made cars are still prized possessions. The driver of a beat-up 1948 Chevrolet said he turned down an offer of about $10,000 for his car. U.S. cars a decade older routinely go for twice that price, equivalent to about five years pay for the average worker. 
More than a million Cubans have fled the island since Castro came to power in 1959 by overthrowing the rightist dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista, but the traffic goes both ways. Many have returned, and about 200 Americans have even settled on the island. A documentary about nine such Americans was shown on television the other day. One was a rock singer, and several others were involved in teaching music and dance. A Christian missionary here since before the revolution says Cuba has given her the chance to carry out the Christian ethic of a life in service to others. Service and self-sacrifice: the same messages Castro has preached to his countrymen for 30 years. 
A visitor has trouble sorting out the conflicting claims Cubans make about their revolution. According to government statistics, enrollment in colleges and universities has increased nine-fold since the year before the revolution. A Havana University law student identified only as Gladys was quoted in an interview with Bohemia Magazine as saying, ``Young people feel secure about their future. They don't live in uncertainty as to whether they will be able to continue their studies or whether they'll be able to find a job afterward. Sometimes I wonder if it isn't all too easy.'' There are, however, some clear signs of discontent. A rock group caused a sensation recently with a song called, ``El Hombre Esta Loco'' (The Man is Crazy). When the group sang the song in mid-November at a local theater, a crowd of thousands broke into a rhythmic chant, repeating the title over and over. Witnesses said the crowd had discovered a clever way of venting anti-Castro feelings without leaving themselves open to charges of anti-government activity. Government radio stations stopped playing the song, but it can still be heard on Radio Marti, the U.S.-funded Voice of America station beamed to Cuba. 
Castro shuns the notion of high salaries as an inducement for hard work, but he has allowed an alternate form of material incentive in an effort to remedy Cuba's terrible housing shortage. A Cuban who is unhappy with his existing home can take a leave of absence from his job and volunteer for work on an apartment construction crew. The worker is paid the same as on his normal job, but hours usually are much longer _ up to 70 a week. The payoff is that the worker, after two years of arduous labor, is entitled to move in to one of the apartments he worked on. He uses about 10 per cent of his income for mortgage payments, and the apartment is his after about 18 years. 
Many Cubans say the country's food-rationing system does not provide enough to eat. An embittered 30-year-old who was once caught trying to escape to the United States in a boat spent three years in prison. He said he now fishes illegally for lobster to support his family. The goverment prohibits domestic consumption of lobster because it is a big source of badly needed foreign exchange. 
Church-state relations are now better than they have been in years. The government expelled 600 priests as counter-revolutionaries in the early 1960s, but now is inviting some back. Thirty returned last year. Several thousand Cubans attended a high-spirited Mass on New Year's night that was said by a papal emissary, Cardinal Roger Ethegaray of France. When he asked the congregation what he should tell Pope John Paul II, a loud and spontaneous chant rose up: ``That he come, that he come.'' The pope's visit is expected in 1990. 
Joel Steinberg used to upset Michele Launders when he stared at her in court. She said Steinberg, charged with fatally beating the daughter Ms. Launders gave up for adoption, frightened her. ``Now I just stare right back,'' said Ms. Launders, and these days it is Steinberg and his lawyers who are occasionally unnerved. Steinberg is charged with second-degree murder, first-degree manslaughter and endangerment of a child in the death of 6-year-old Lisa Steinberg. The girl, whom he illegally adopted in 1981, died of a brain injury three days after she was removed unconscious from Steinberg's Greenwich Village apartment Nov. 2, 1987. Lisa's death in an upscale home _ Steinberg was an attorney, now disbarred, and his companion, Hedda Nussbaum, was a children's book editor _ shocked New Yorkers and sparked investigations into how child abuse cases can slip through the cracks of welfare agencies and schools. Every day since Steinberg's trial began nine weeks ago, Ms. Launders, 27, has occupied a front-row seat. The trial, on haitus for the holidays, was being resumed today. Ms. Launders sits directly behind Steinberg, staring at his back and watching his constant note-taking and nervous movements. The week before Christmas, she watched him hop out of the room on his right foot because he had sprained his left ankle in a touch football game at the Rikers Island jail. She laughed aloud. But more often Ms. Launders cries, which Steinberg's attorneys fear may influence the jury. On Dec. 12, defense lawyer Ira London sought to have her removed from the front row because she was crying and holding hands with another woman. State Supreme Court Justice Harold Rothwax refused. ``It's not easy to hide my feelings, but I've acted with restraint,'' Ms. Launders said outside the courtroom later as she crushed a cigarette butt. ``The one time I was overwhelmed I left the courtroom.'' Ms. Launders met Steinberg in a Nassau County diner in April 1981, through her physician, Michael Bergman. Unwed, pregnant and 19, Ms. Launders paid Steinberg $500 for what he called filing fees to arrange for her unborn child's adoption into a middle-class Catholic family. She says that when Lisa was born May 14, 1981, she had no idea Steinberg planned to keep the baby himself. Another baby Steinberg illegally adopted under similar circumstances from an unwed teen-ager was a 17-month-old boy that police found tethered to a chair and wallowing in excrement the day police removed Lisa from the apartment. The boy, whom the Steinbergs named Mitchell, was returned to his biological mother, Nicole Smigiel, of Massapequa Park, who took custody and changed his name to Travis Christian. She has not attended the trial, though her mother, Graceann, has sat at Miss Launders' side from time to time during the trial. A middle-level manager for an insurance company, Ms. Launders said in a recent interview that she has been unable to work since Lisa's death. ``My mind isn't there yet,'' she said. ``I can't concentrate.'' She said she visits Lisa's grave often, sometimes with the girl's father, whom she refuses to identify. Although it's wrenching to attend the trial every day, she said she comes to court partly because of guilt and partly because she wants to know what happened. But she also shows up because she wants to see Steinberg convicted. ``It's killing me to do it but I'm not going to stop coming,'' Ms. Launders said. ``I'm going to come here every day until justice is done. That will be the day Steinberg is convicted of murder and sentenced to life in prison for what he did to Lisa.'' Ms. Launders also said she now feels that Ms. Nussbaum, the prosecution's chief witness, deserves more blame than she has received. ``She should be on trial,'' said Ms. Launders, ``maybe not for murder but for other charges.'' Prosecutors dropped charges against Ms. Nussbaum before the trial, saying she had been so physically and mentally incapacitated by repeated beatings that she was not responsible for Lisa's death. 
The victims of Agent Orange finally will get their compensatory payments in 1989, more than a decade after Vietnam veterans first sued the defoliant's makers and 16 years after the U.S. pullout from Indochina. The first payments are expected to go out in March or April. More than 64,000 applications have been mailed to veterans or their families, and 2,000 to 3,000 additional veterans applied before the Jan. 1 deadline for cash benefits that will average about $5,700. The money for veteran's payments comes from a $170 million fund, part of the settlement of a class-action lawsuit brought in 1978. The total settlement was $180 million, but the fund has grown to $240 million with interest. Payments will be made to individuals, to families and to social service agencies that help Vietnam veterans, said Kenneth Feinberg, the court-appointed special master who helped settle the suit. ``My feelings are ones of frustration and relief,'' said Feinberg. ``Frustration because it took so long and relief because those who are entitled to the money will finally get it.'' The court has estimated that about 30,000 veterans and 18,000 survivor families will be eligible for the special benefits. Early projections showed eligible veterans would receive an average total of about $5,700; the most anyone can expect to receive is $12,800. ``Even though it may not be enough money, what it does is begin the healing process,'' said Frank McCarthy, a veteran who was active in the litigation. ``These children, these families who have lost loved ones, these totally disabled veterans are the bottom line and we have to help them now.'' The federal lawsuit was brought in 1978 by veterans who claimed exposure to the chemical defoliant _ sprayed over Southeast Asia during the 1960s by the U.S. military in an attempt to deprive Communist troops of crops and cover _ caused cancer, birth defects in their children and other illnesses. The herbicide contains the highly toxic chemical dioxin. In 1984, hours before the trial was to start, the seven manufacturers of the chemical agreed to pay $180 million but denied liability for any injuries. The money has been tied up since in legal challenges. The U.S. Supreme Court cleared the last obstacle in June, and soon after, U.S. District Judge Jack B. Weinstein announced plans for dispersal of the money. Weinstein, who presided over the case and continues to oversee the distribution, split the settlement fund. The first component sets aside $170 million for the Agent Orange Veteran Payment Program, which will provide cash benefits to veterans considered totally disabled under Social Security guidelines and to the families of veterans whose deaths were linked to Agent Orange. An additional $52 million was earmarked for the Agent Orange Class Assistance Program, which will distribute grants to social service agencies that serve Vietnam veterans and their families. Of the remaining money, $5 million was distributed to Australian and New Zealand military personnel who were exposed to Agent Orange in Vietnam, and $13 million went for attorneys' fees and other expenses. The Jan 1. deadline does not affect veterans who later become aware of an Agent Orange-connected illness or succumb to such a disease. Those claims can be filed until Dec. 31, 1994. Aetna Life Insurance Co. was appointed to process the claims and set up a separate unit in Hartford, Conn., to administer the payment program, according to Bill Cotter, a consultant for the company. He said Aetna already has received back 10,000 filled-out applications of the 64,000 sent out. A toll-free telephone number drew more than 60,000 calls, he said. ``We have had so many different types of calls _ the very angry veterans who are quite abusive on the phones, the very courteous who are pleased with the information and the veterans who have broken down and sobbed,'' he said. The assistance program is headed by Dennis Rhoades, a Vietnam veteran who was director of the American Legion's National Economic Commission. Rhoades said he is reviewing about 140 proposals from agencies seeking grants from the $52 million fund. He expects to authorize the first grants in three to six months. 
The Duke and Dutchess of York did not set a trend by naming their daughter Beatrice _ at least not among parents who announced the birth of a child in the Times of London last year. Alice and Charlotte were the most popular girls' first names chosen by those parents, says Helen Beard, the paper's social editor. ``The royal birth on Aug. 8 seems to have had no effect on the commoners' choice, at least among Times-reading parents,'' she wrote on Monday. Lists of most popular names have become a favorite feature in the paper at this time each year. One list _ all-names _ comprises the names that most often appear in cases where parents give their children two or more forenames. The second list _ first-names _ comprises only the most popular choice of first forename chosen by parents. Ms. Beard wrote: ``A total of 5,531 births were gazetted (in 1988), of whom 2,659 were girls and 2,872 were boys; (in 1987), out of a total of 5,477, boys were in a majority of 134. ``James again led both the first-name and the all-names leagues for boys. Elizabeth was still way ahead in the girls' all-names list; but she failed even to obtain a place (among the top 10) in the first-name league, which is now jointly led by Alice (for the first time) and Charlotte. ``In the all-names leagues, Henry supplanted Christopher, while Rose, Alexandra and Lucy ousted Emma, Jane and Emily. Katherine is back among the first names (out goes Rebecca). The list of boys' first names and their order are little changed, but Christopher, Robert and Henry squeezed out George and Benjamin.'' The Times has a daily circulation of about 450,000 in this country of 56 million people. 
Orthodox Jewish leaders have reluctantly given the go-ahead for construction of a shopping center on a plot of land surrounded on three sides by a Jewish cemetery, a rabbi said Monday. The Chicago Rabbinical Council decided that the five-acre parcel owned by the Jewish Waldheim Cemetery and leased to a developer is not consecrated land. ``The rabbis were very unhappy about it, and had we been asked (in advance) we certainly would have said no,'' said Rabbi Paul S. Greenman, a member and past president of the council. ``(But) since it's already in progress, it can continue.'' Some people who have relatives buried in the cemetery in this suburb west of Chicago had objected to the construction of a Sportmart Inc., sporting goods outlet and three other stores on the land. The Des Plaines Cemetery Corp., which owns the land, said the land was originally reserved for burials but many Jewish families have moved from the area, reducing the demand for burial plots. Larry Hochberg, president of Sportmart Inc., said when the controversy surfaced in early December that he had consulted a rabbi before going ahead with construction plans. He said the rabbi, whom he would not identify, had assured company officials that graves would not be harmed by the project. Greenman said the council agreed that the project, scheduled for completion next summer, will not disturb any graves. It also will be separated from the cemetery by fencing and landscaping. Sportmart said in a statement Sunday that it will spend $200,000 on drainage pipes to prevent flooding of nearby gravesites and has repaved 2,000 feet of cemetery roads. 
Twenty Czechs broke the world record for indoor soccer last month, playing the game continuously for 107 hours and 15 minutes, the official Czechoslovak news agency CTK reported. Two teams began the endeavour in the West Bohemian town of Holysov on Dec. 13 and ended with the new world record on Dec. 17, CTK said in the dispatch Monday. According to the news agency, the previous record of 106 hours 10 minutes was held by English players. The Czechs new record is to be recorded in the Guinness Book of World Records, CTK said. 
The government says consumer prices rose 1,722 percent last year, the highest single-year mark in memory, and one economic forecasting firm predicts they will rise at more than three times that rate this year. Economists say the rampant inflation is tied to a steep recession that weakened the economy following a growth rate of 8.5 percent in 1986 and of 6.7 percent in 1987. Economy Minister Carlos Rivas said last week that early estimates indicate the economy shrank 8.4 percent in 1988. ``We are now paying the price for two years of growth,'' President Alan Garcia said recently. The crisis has been marked by shortages of basic foods, such as milk, sugar and bread, and by increasing discontent among the 21 million Peruvians. Political analysts say the flagging economy together with a relentless insurgency by leftist guerrillas are undermining Peru's frail democracy. Rivas said a major cause of record inflation was government deficit spending to finance consumer subsidies. The inflation figure of 158.3 percent set in 1985 had been the highest since Peru began keeping such records in 1920. The National Statistics Institute, in its report Monday, said consumer prices in December increased by 40.9 percent compared with the month previous. Garcia, a center-left populist, took office in July 1985 and used Peru's dollar reserves to subsidize imports needed for Peru's economic recovery. Consumer prices surged early in 1988 after the reserves ran out and the government maintained its program of subsidies through heavy deficit spending, said economists, speaking on condition of anonymity. The respected economics analysis firm Apoyo predicted inflation this year will hit at least 6,000 percent. 
The Energy Department is proposing an $81 billion, 20-year program to clean up and modernize the nation's troubled nuclear weapons production complex. ``The cost of modernization and environmental restoration will require a significant increase in funding for the next two decades,'' said an Energy Department report for delivery to Congress. The $81 billion total includes $52 billion to modernize outdated facilities, some of which are more than 30 years old, while $29 billion would go toward efforts to deal with radioactive and chemical contamination at many sites throughout the weapons complex. The long-range plan would involve building new facilities in South Carolina and Idaho as well as phasing out weapons production activities in Washington state, Colorado and Ohio. The Energy Department has refused to release any portions of the classified document, known as the ``2010 Report'' because it looks ahead as far as the 2010 fiscal year. Gail Bradshaw, deputy chief spokesman for the department, said this week the department could not release the report's unclassified executive summary until it had received permission to do so from the National Security Council. A copy of the summary was obtained by Morris News Service and made available to The Associated Press. Energy Secretary John S. Herrington said Dec. 22 the next administration faces ``hard choices'' in dealing with the problems of the nuclear weapons complex. He told a National Press Club audience that cannibalization of some warheads to build or upgrade others is something ``we must look at to keep our options open.'' But Herrington added, ``I do not anticipate the need'' to resort to such methods. The possibility of cannibalizing warheads was raised after safety and equipment problems closed the nation's three reactors for producing tritium, a radioactive isotope of hydrogen. Because tritium decays at a rate of 5.5 percent a year, it needs to be regularly replenished to keep warheads at peak explosive power. Herrington has said it will be spring or summer before any of the three reactors at the Savannah River Plant near Aiken, S.C., can be restarted. The 2010 Report raises questions about whether the Savannah River reactors can be brought back to efficient production of tritium. It noted that ``all three reactors are shut down for safety system improvements and are not expected to be fully operational until late 1989. Despite these improvements and increasingly extensive maintenance, the reactors may not be able to achieve acceptable production efficiencies.'' Other key findings of the report: _The nuclear weapons complex must be modernized so nuclear deterrence can continue to be a vital element of U.S. security policy. _Operations of the complex will require environmental, safety and health remedial actions and a program to ensure that its operations comply with applicable laws, standards and regulations. _Much of the nuclear weapons complex was constructed more than 30 years ago, and many facilities are approaching the end of their useful lives. _Full funding for the modernization and environmental cleanup effort will probably be difficult to achieve, in view of competition with other programs. The report said that while the budget for fiscal 1990 will be ``generally consistent'' with the plan, accomplishing all recommendations on schedule probably will require more resources than are now expected to be available in subsequent years. _``Major environmental restoration'' will be required at the Rocky Flats Plant near Denver, the Hanford Reservation near Richland, Wash., and the Feed Materials Production Center in Fernald, Ohio, when nuclear weapons activities there are either relocated or terminated. As an interim measure, certain upgrade steps will be required at the Rocky Flats Plant to maintain operations ``at an acceptable level of risk'' while the relocated facilities are being constructed. _New production reactors are slated for the Savannah River Plant and the Idaho National Engineering Laboratory. DOE has proposed building a heavy water reactor at Savannah River and a gas-cooled reactor at the Idaho facility. _Both the administration and Congress recognize the need for the modernization and cleanup program, and ``expeditious implementation'' of the proposed plan is recommended, the report summary said. 
1989 has begun for Soviets with Mikhail S. Gorbachev warning them not to expect ``manna from heaven'' and a multitude of signs _ from barren shop shelves to astrology _ heralding another hard year in the building of communism. Year IV of ``perestroika,'' Gorbachev's driv to refashion Soviet economy and society, will bring the first national multicandidate elections in decades, part of the his campaign for ``democratization,'' and continued streamlining in the economy. But at the dawn of the year, as Moscow shivered in subzero cold, such common items as detergent, bath soap, chickens, coffee, toothpaste, sugar, yeast and candy were hard to find or completely absent from state-run stores. On Sunday the Kremlin announced an export ban on goods ranging from caviar to children's shoes, an apparent attempt to hoard chronically scarce Soviet-made products for Soviet consumers. In his televised New Year's Eve message, Gorbachev told his 285 million countrymen that improvements in their lives would be gradual at best in the coming months, and that there would be no miracles. ``It is wrong to think, comrades, that somebody will solve our problems for us and that everything around us will change at the wave of a magic wand, with the chime of the clock on New Year's Eve,'' he said. ``We see now that it is essential to act with greater resoluteness,'' said Gorbachev, Soviet leader since March 1985. ``We are not awaiting and we are not promising manna from heaven, knowing well that the burden of unresolved issues is heavy, and our road is difficult.'' For some, that message may have seemed distressingly like Gorbachev's forecast at the beginning of 1988, when he said ``immense and hard work'' lay ahead in his drive for economic change. The multibillion-ruble cost of rebuilding areas of northwestern Armenia shattered by the Dec. 7 earthquake also will cause shortages in the economy, for example in building materials, Prime Minister Nikolai I. Ryzhkov has said. On Jan. 1, all 48,000 state-run enterprises in the nation were put on a pay-their-own-way basis, meaning they are deprived of government subsidies and forced to find ways to generate enough revenue to meet costs and payroll. For Soviet managers accustomed to top-heavy centralized controls, which severely limited their initiative but also freed them from many decision-making responsibilities, ``self-accounting'' is a mixed blessing. They are free to negotiate contracts and pursue the once-forbidden goal of making a profit, but also in theory may face bankruptcy if they fail. The nation's 130 million workers, too, can theoretically earn more if they produce more, but run the risk of layoffs if their factory trims its labor force to cut costs. According to Radio Moscow, enterprises that account for 60 percent of Soviet industrial output have been on ``self-accounting'' since January 1988. The jury is still out, however, on whether they have gained much freedom. One Soviet economist, Nikolai Shmelov, has said government bureaucrats still exercise effective control over some branches of the economy by issuing them 80 percent and more of their orders they must fill. In March, voters will be called to elect the members of a new Council of People's Deputies that will choose their membership of their national parliament and name a head of state with increased powers. The sole candidate for the new presidential post is widely expected to be the 57-year-old Gorbachev himself, posing further questions about how democratic the Kremlin's ``democratization'' process can or will be. At lower levels, however, voters will be able to choose from more than one candidate, in contrast to past practice, when electoral nominees were selected according to social status, age and sex to fill quotas fixed in Moscow. 1989 will also bring uncertainty in international relations, as the Kremlin seeks a working relationship with a new U.S. president and decides whether to complete its now-frozen military withdrawal from Afghanistan in time to meet a U.N.-brokered Feb. 15 deadline. Shortly before Gorbachev went on TV with his New Year's message, the official news agency Tass transmitted new year's greetings to English-language subscribers along with the image of a snake, a reminder that according to Oriental astrology, 1989 is the Year of the Snake. Some Soviets, in humor or in earnest, note that past such years in the 12-year Oriental cycle have been the occasion of tragic or cataclysmic happenings in their homeland, and predict an eventful 1989. In 1905, there was an abortive anti-czarist revolution. In 1917, the Bolshevik Revolution brought the Communists to power. In 1929, dictator Josef V. Stalin began the bloody campaign to snuff out private farming. In 1941, the Nazis attacked the Soviet Union. And in 1953, Stalin died, and was succeeded by Nikita S. Khrushchev. 
The weather continues to be the biggest question mark for Agriculture Department economists trying to figure out where U.S. farm production may be headed in 1989. For example, most analysts say the historical record shows little chance that the devastating drought of 1988 _ which shriveled crop production by 30 percent _ will repeat this year. But the drought's effects are still apparent in much of the land, where subsoil moisture has yet to recover. And even long-shot odds of the 1988 heat and drought repeating are causing USDA economists a few nightmares. The uncertainties are important as the economists look at all crop prospects, but they are particularly vital for feed grains and how this year's output might affect livestock producers. Dave Hull of the department's Economic Research Service says in the January-February issue of Agricultural Outlook magazine the acreage of corn and other feed grains is expected to increase in 1989 because of a relaxation in the government's land-idling requirements. The program changes, he said, could add 8 million to 10 million acres to this year's corn plantings. In all, the corn area for harvest next fall could be in the range of 67 million to 69 million acres, compared with an estimated 56.7 million harvested in 1988. Last year's corn production was 4.67 billion bushels, down from 7.06 billion in 1987 and 8.25 billion in 1986. Yields averaged 82.3 bushels per harvested acre, compared with more than 119 bushels per acre in each of the two previous years. ``Many estimates of 1989 corn yields range from 110 to 115 bushels per acre, although these forecasts may be weighting the 1988 disaster and potential weather problems a bit too heavily,'' Hull said. ``If weather cooperates (in 1989), yields of 120 bushels per acre are not out of the question, considering long-term trend increases of more than 2 bushels per year.'' If that happens, he said, farmers could harvest between 7.7 billion and 8.3 billion bushels of corn next fall. Hull said that if 1989 corn production is at the low side of these projections farmers probably would see some decline in market prices in the 1989-90 season. The agency currently projects corn prices will average $2.40 to $2.80 per bushel in the 1988-89 marketing year that began last Sept. 1. But if this year's harvest is at the higher end of the projection range, the price decline would be much sharper as U.S. stockpiles once again start to rebuild. Hull said prices then could drop in 1989-90 to near the government's price support loan rate of $1.65 per bushel. ``If yields return to normal, 1989-90 production of barley, oats and sorghum also is likely to rebound,'' he said. ``Stocks of barley and oats would tend to build modestly if production returns to normal, and prices probably will fall.'' Soghum output ``is likely to rebound'' this year if yields are normal, although total use may continue to exceed production, Hull said. Prices will probably continue to be pegged to roughly 90 percent of corn prices. 
The Agriculture Department says another major advance has been made in the long struggle against the boll weevil, for generations a fabled devastator of cotton crops. Fred Planer of the department's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service says the latest campaign ended Dec. 3 after 35 weeks of eradication efforts. The cooperative project, called the Southeast Boll Weevil Eradication Program, involved a total of 482,000 acres in Alabama, Florida, Georgia and South Carolina. Federal and state agencies, along with the grower-supported Boll Weevil Eradication Foundation, cooperated in the venture. Planer said USDA and state surveys showed that 99 percent of the fields in the program sustained no weevil damage in 1988. Program activities include trapping surveys using traps baited with sex scents, or pherromones, to determine weevil numbers and distribution, and field treatments with malathion, an insecticide used commonly in mosquito control programs. ``The real key to the success of this progrm is uniform participation of all cotton producers so that weevils can't run away from one farm and go to another,'' Planer said. ``With uniform participation, there's no place for the weevils to hide.'' The Southeast program began in September 1987, following the successful eradication of the boll weevil through a similar program in areas of Virginia and the Carolinas, he said. 
Handcuffed by public refusal to accept a speed limit on the autobahns, West German lawmakers have issued a compromise order to curb rising accident rates. It is now the law that drivers must be polite. Aggression in the form of dangerously high speeds and daredevil maneuvers accounted for many of the 400,000 injury-causing accidents in West Germany in 1988, according to police and automobile club statistics. The revised rules that took effect Sunday include a prohibition against blinking headlights to pressure slower drivers to move to the right, as well as a finder's-keeper's policy on parking spaces, which are at a premium in most cities. A nation renowned for its fast cars and frustrated drivers, West Germany has more traffic volume than any nation in Europe. It also suffers the continent's highest injury-accident rate. Fatal accidents _ about 8,000 last year _ have been considerably reduced in the past 10 years. But the number of collisions rose by more than 10 percent in 1988 and moving violations were up by 28 percent over 1987. Recent mild winters, coupled with cheaper gas prices due to a strong West German mark, have intensified the problem of too many cars traveling too fast on too few roads. ``The problem is that drivers are becoming increasingly aggressive on the highways, borrowing the idea from Americans that time is money,'' said Andreas Zimmermann, regional traffic division chief for ADAC, West Germany's largest automobile club. The new ``Intelligent Use of the Streets'' legislation aims to diffuse some of the aggression by punishing drivers for infractions that until now have been considered impolite but not illegal. The more than 100 minor revisions to the 1971 driving code are seen as a token of consolation for the outnumbered advocates of speed limits and environmental protection. Public opinion polls have shown the vast majority of West German drivers favor a retention of the status quo _ no speed limits at all. They have rallied under the cry of ``Free Ways for Free Folks'' and through the powerful car industry and auto club lobbies fought off all attempts to cool their engines. More than 1 million of the 28 million registered automobiles are capable of sustained speeds exceeding 125 mph, according to the ADAC, which is the world's second-largest auto club after the AAA in the United States. Some politicians of the opposition Social Democrat party and the environmentalist Greens annually have put forward measures to establish a limit of 60 mph, but have been defeated by the dominant Christian Democrats and members of their own parties concerned about voter reaction. Short of forcing drivers to slow down, the new laws require them to cease the widespread practice of using headlights and blinkers to pressure slower cars into moving out of their way. Tailgating also has been outlawed, as well as passing too closely _ a favorite punishment meted out by drivers miffed at having to change lanes to get by a slower car. Truck drivers hauling dangerous cargo must pull into the nearest parking turnout when visibility drops to less than 165 feet because of fog, snow or rain. Vehicles long have been prohibited from passing on the right, but the code revision makes the offense one that can damage a driver's record and eventually lead to license revocation. Many drivers argue that despite the law, German practice on a three-lane autobahn dictates that slower cars use the right lane, fast cars the left and the middle lane is to remain open for passing from both sides. Some of the more controversial and less-enforceable rules govern parking, including a requirement that the first car in a line of autos circling for a free space has claim to the next open spot _ even if the driver has already passed it by. Drivers are also required to activate their warning blinkers as soon as they see a traffic backup on an autobahn, with the aim of preventing the kind of multiple smashups that often occur in the fog or when backups are obscured by a rise or turn in the road. Dieter Schulte, parliamentary secretary for the federal Transport Ministry and a member of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democrat Party, said more than $230 million will be invested in improving signs and roads as part of the new legal changes. ``Not only will these changes reduce the hazards from backups and passing, but they will also save energy and reduce environmental problems like noise and exhaust,'' Schulte said. Others argue, however, that drivers will begin to depend on the new signs to warn them of road-blocking hazards ahead and drive even faster when no warnings are visible. ``With the best intentions, the changes may have negative consequences for safety and the environment,'' Zimmerman conceded. Some of the new rules, irreverently referred to as ``the Polite Driving Act,'' are virtually unenforceable, such as requiring drivers to alert one another about hazards they themselves may not react to in time. But the regulations are expected to deter some of the aggressive practices because violations will count against a driver's record. West German drivers are not required to renew their licenses once they have passed initial tests and a two-year probation period, unless they've accumulated a considerable series of citations in a short period. The point system differentiates between character offenses and accidents, ascribing a higher penalty for drunken driving than for killing a pedestrian in a crosswalk. Points also are recorded for offenses such as misuse of blinkers or following too closely, previously punishable only by fines. The success of the new system will depend heavily on the driving public, which to date has shown little interest or understanding of the revisions. Drivers questioned at gas stations over the New Year's weekend expressed amusement over the effort to get them to mind their manners. ``Sure I'll be polite,'' promised one BMW driver who gave his name only as Rudolf. ``As long as the trucks and the timid stay out of the left lane.'' 
Daniel Ortega paused for a moment to ponder his major achievement as president, then responded confidently: ``Resisting the war policies of the Reagan administration aimed at destroying the revolution.'' ``The cost has been social and economic, in losses of lives and raw materials,'' Ortega said in an interview with The Associated Press. ``But the reality is that the revolution is here.'' Ortega, 43, heads the Sandinista government brought to power in 1979 by a revolution that ended four decades of dictatorial rule by the Somoza dynasty. President Reagan, charging the new government with fomenting revolution in the region, began financing Contra rebels in 1981 to oust the Sandinistas and end what he said was a beachhead for communism. With Reagan leaving office soon and the Contras reduced to what Ortega calls ``delinquent bands,'' Ortega hopes to restore the dreams of a socialist society based on equality. ``I have the hope that President Bush will work on a constructive line,'' Ortega said. He declined to elaborate on a proposal his government is preparing to deliver to Bush. Ortega described the Sandinista government as socialist, with its ideal goal a classic communism in which there is an equal distribution of wealth. ``This is a socialist revolution that is in a stage where a mixed economy and political pluralism are factors of the socialism that we have been constructing in Nicaragua,'' he said. ``Yes, socialism is a step toward communism, but to speak of communism, I think that would be utopian right now,'' Ortega said. ``To speak of socialism in which there is social and economic development and to have a society in which the distribution of wealth would be really equal and rational, this is a proposal, it is an objective.'' Private enterprise exists in Nicaragua and the state does not hold a majority of the land. The government's ideals have crumbled under the weight of an economy that has worsened yearly. Inflation, Ortega said, stands at an inconceivable 21,000 percent. Many Nicaraguans are suffering from hunger for the first time. Meager wages fail to provide the basics, and tens of thousands of Nicaraguans have fled the country. But he said the fact that the Sandinistas will celebrate their 10th anniversary in power in July means ``there's no doubt the (revolutionary) process is irreversible.'' Ortega himself has changed markedly in the past decade. His railings against the United States and President Reagan have taken on a softer, more rational tone and he peppers them with facts and figures. In the interview, conducted Saturday, he did not employ the harsh rhetoric he has used in the past. He simply said the 29,000 dead in Nicaragua would be comparable in the United States to losing the entire population of Minnesota. Ortega rose to leader of the nine-member Sandinista directorate following the 1984 elections in which he won the presidency. He consolidated his control a year later when he became the head of the party's executive commission. Sandinista watchers frequently point to the differences between Ortega, seen as a pragmatist, and the hardline Tomas Borge, one of the founders of the party, a directorate member and the current interior minister. Ortega seems to have won out. Ortega is a populist, supported at times even when the Sandinista party suffers criticism. The press and a majority of citizens call him by his first name. He frequently is seen in casual clothes _ a sport shirt and cotton jacket with jeans _ rather than his military uniform. He drives himself around town in a jeep, along with heavily armed security agents in identical jeeps. Ortega has altered his image as a tough guerrilla fighter jailed as a teen-ager to that of supporter of the arts, poet and an opera buff. The president speaks quietly and is seen as a good listener. He frequently travels to the countryside to meet with peasants. During a town hall-type meeting a few months ago, Ortega was applauded when he called to task a factory manager after an employee complained. He was patted on the back when he handed out Christmas presents to deprived youths in the capital. Political opposition figures often call Ortega a dictator. Supporters refer to him as ``El Comandante.'' Ortega has said he hopes to repair relations with the United States, but vows that his nation's internal politics aren't up for negotiation. Recently, he fondly recalled meeting Bush in Brazil for the 1985 presidential inauguration. The two men shook hands and the guests packed into the Brazilian congress cheered. ``It's a start,'' Ortega said. 
A new game-show video for low-income mothers will try to make viewers winners by teaching them how to properly care for their newborns, researchers say. The 15-minute video, entitled ``The Baby Game,'' will use a game-show format to convey information about infant nutrition and care. It's aimed at people who are turned off by informational presentations. ``We're using the strategy that, if it can be entertaining, it will be watched; therefore the information will get across,'' said Dennis Darmek, manager of television services at Marquette University. The university is creating the video at the request of the Hunger Task Force of Milwaukee's Infant Nutrition Project. The video features a host and three contestants affiliated with a comedy troupe, Darmek said. The mock game show depicts three new mothers in a hospital being told they were selected as contestants and asked questions on child care. The video comes complete with commercials, which are public service announcements on infant care, he said. It will be shown to new mothers at Milwaukee-area hospitals just before they are released. ``This is a last-ditch effort to get across some important information,'' said Vickie Strattner, a registered nurse and task force volunteer. 
President Reagan and his wife, Nancy, received his-and-hers silver belt buckles from an admirer as they prepared to leave this desert resort and wind up their final presidential vacation. Gerry Fitch, 72, of Cherokee Village, Ark., on Monday handed the president an ornately carved box with the gifts as the Reagans prepared to board Air Force One at Palm Springs International Airport. ``When I gave it to him, his eyes sprang open,'' Fitch said. ``He told me, `Thank you very much and have a very happy new year.'' The buckles were crafted by Fitch and designed by his wife, Twyla, 70, for a presidential visit in 1986 to celebrate Arkansas's 150th anniversary, but that trip was canceled. Reagan's buckle bore a map of the United States, marked with places where Reagan spent his life in California, including a horseshoe to mark the president's Rancho del Cielo home in the Santa Ynez Mountains and a circle to define Hollywood. Mrs. Reagan's buckle, imbedded with coral, turquoise and a gold heart, simply read: ``No. 1 Lady.'' The Reagans left Palm Springs, where they stayed at the Rancho Mirage home of millionaire publisher Walter Annenberg, and traveled to Los Angeles where they will spend time at their Bel-Air home. 
``Wheel of Fortune'' host Pat Sajak said he decided against having a female sidekick on his late-night talk show because it might upset viewers accustomed to seeing him with letter-turner Vanna White. Explaining why he chose sidekick Dan Miller rather than a woman, Sajak said some viewers might feel ``as though Vanna and I had gotten a divorce or something.'' CBS spent more than $4 million to build a new sound stage and other facilities for Sajak's 90-minute show, which debuts Monday. The show will rely on a traditional format spiced by live interviews. Hip comic Arsenio Hall, whose hour-long syndicated talk show debuts tonight, says he will try to reach a new audience. ``I think people place too much emphasis on the competition; I'm running my own race,'' he said. ``It's a personal best, it's me against me.'' Hall said he will try to create an air of spontaneity and plans to avoid relying on guests with youth appeal. ``I'd love to talk to Ronald Reagan,'' he said. ``There isn't anyone who I would consider too old and square.'' 
Millionaire Democrat and U.S. Senator-elect Herbert H. Kohl says he will continue to run the Milwaukee Bucks basketball team but will give two trustees control of his other assets. Kohl, who was being sworn in today, said Monday he wanted to insure that the National Basketball Association team he purchased in 1985 would not be sold and moved from Milwaukee. Kohl said his brother, Sidney Kohl, of Palm Beach, Fla., and Ralph Loewenberg, a New York City investment adviser, would take control of his assets. ``I have taken this step for two reasons: to eliminate the potential of any conflict of interest and to assure the people of Wisconsin I will be a full-time senator,'' he said. Kohl, 53, defeated Republican Susan Engeleiter for the seat vacated by retiring Democratic Sen. William Proxmire. Kohl said he will continue to release his state and federal income tax returns each year, but he has refused repeatedly to release the value of his assets. He said in October his net income in 1987 was $4.2 million. 
Mayor Thomas G. Dunn, believed to be the longest-serving mayor of a major American city, pledged his unwavering service as he was sworn in for his seventh and possibly last four-year term. ``I dedicate every waking moment to this city. I've made it more than a full-time job,'' the 67-year-old Democrat said Monday after being escorted into the City Council chambers by a kilt-clad bagpipe player and wearing shamrock-covered suspenders. ``He's a real person,'' said John Surmay, who in 24 years in Elizabeth has seen only one mayor. ``In this plastic world we live in, he's not plastic, phony or shallow, and he's not a wimp. He's made a lot of decisions and is ready to back up every one of them.'' 
Film director Peter Bogdanovich has married the younger sister of murdered Playboy magazine model Dorothy Stratten, a lawyer representing Bogdanovich said Monday. Stratten, a 1980 Playmate of the Year who acted in a film directed by Bogdanovich, was shot and killed by her husband, Paul Snider, in August 1980 in California. The killing reportedly occurred after Snider learned his wife was having an affair with Bogdanovich. Bogdanovich, 49, married Louise Hoogstratten, 20, also known as L.B. Stratten, last Friday morning at a hotel in the Vancouver, British Columbia, area, said Joel R. Junker, a Seattle attorney who described himself as the director's immigration lawyer. The couple had planned a church wedding in Los Angeles later this spring, but married earlier in Canada on their advice of their lawyers, Junker said. ``That's so Mrs. Bogdanovich, who is a Canadian citizen, would be able to be with her husband in Los Angeles,'' Junker said in a telephone interview from his Seattle home. Bogdanovich, who directed ``The Last Picture Show,'' ``Paper Moon'' and ``Mask,'' has filed a petition to obtain permanent residence status for his wife in the United States, Junker said. Ms. Hoogstratten had been in the United States on a visitor's visa, the lawyer said. He declined to provide any other details on the couple or the ceremony and said no statement was available from either Bogdanovich or his bride. Nelly Hoogstratten, Louise's mother, said on Vancouver television that she was not informed about the wedding. ``I've cried before, and I cry now because I've lost another daughter,'' she said when interviewed on the doorstep of her home. Bogdanovich, in a book titled ``The Killing of the Unicorn: Dorothy Stratten, 1960-1980,'' criticized Hugh Hefner's Playboy empire for its alleged role in events he said ended in Miss Stratten's death. In the book, Bogdanovich wrote of how he was captivated by the innocent charm of Ms. Stratten, whom he directed in her best-known film, ``They All Laughed,'' a comedy with John Ritter, Audrey Hepburn and Ben Gazzara. In the mid-1980s, stories surfaced of a relationship between Bogdanovich and Ms. Stratten's younger sister. Louise Stratten filed a slander lawsuit against Hefner and Burl Eldridge, who was married to her mother from May 1980 to January 1981. The suit contended Hefner and Eldridge falsely told reporters Bogdanovich had seduced Louise Stratten when she was 13 and also had sexual relations with her mother after the older sister was killed. The lawsuit also said Hefner and Eldridge claimed Bogdanovich had paid for Louise Stratten to have plastic surgery to make her look more like her late sister. Hefner also said Bogdanovich's published criticism contributed to a stroke he suffered. Louise Stratten dropped the lawsuit in August 1985 and Bogdanovich said at the time he hoped that resolution would end his feud with Hefner. Both men publicly made peace. 
Leung Wan Chou shops at convenience stores and celebrates Thanksgiving since immigrating to this country, but when it comes to soap operas she heads to Chinatown to rent a Cantonese version of ``Dallas.'' The elderly housewife is one of thousands of Asian-Americans whose years in America have failed to dampen their love for Hong Kong-style dramas. ``I have to watch several tapes (of Cantonese soaps) every night. Otherwise I can't sleep,'' said Leung, who has moved to a middle-class neighborhhood outside of Chinatown since immigrating 20 years ago from Hong Kong. Chinatown waiter Hui Ming Kee likes to spend the days of his life watching videotapes of such popular soaps as ``Man in a Net'' and ``Family Feud'' (no relation to the American television program), both based loosely on ``Dallas.'' In one sitting at home, he said he watched seven three-hour tapes without interruption. Hui said the tapes are his major form of entertainment. Asian-Americans lease 900 tapes in an average week at one Chinatown rental shop, the manager said. ``They (customers) nearly emptied out our inventory of the more popular tapes just before Thanksgiving weekend,'' said Lily Yee, supervisor of the Hong Kong TV Video. The locations are strictly Hong Kong in most tapes and the soaps often reflect such Confucian ideals as loyalty to the family, respect for one's parents and dedication to work. 
Ushers at Carnegie Hall move from the back of the auditorium to center stage tonight when they present a free art exhibition and concert of Brahms, Chopin, Puccini and Bartok. ``It's a great opportunity to show the other ushers _ and everyone _ just what we can do,'' said five-year usher Brian Matthews, who organized the event at Carnegie's Weill Recital Hall. Matthews, a bass who graduated from the Juilliard School, plans to sing a Schubert song. Nearly half the 63 ushers at Carnegie Hall have musical or artistic training. Many are pursuing careers in the arts, and find it convenient to work as ushers at night. ``It's ideal for musicians, since it gives us the whole day to practice,'' said Leslie Warren, one of 17 ushers planning to take part in tonight's event. Ms. Warren, a graduate of the Eastman School of Music, is a harpist. ``Artists like the job because you can work at night and still have the light during the day,'' said Jenne Currie, a painter whose work will be on display. She has studied at Carnegie Hall's neighbor, the Art Students League of New York. ``This concert gives ushers a chance to say they've performed at Carnegie Hall,'' said Matthews. 
The reporters at the Roosevelt Bulletin know their readers. Almost all of them. There are only 911 people in this tiny central New Jersey town founded in 1936 as an experiment in socialism and named after FDR. ``But there are a lot of people expecting babies,'' said Honey Socholitzky. At 78, Mrs. Socholitzky is a copy editor at the monthly newspaper run by residents who volunteer to cover their school board, their planning board and their neighbors. The staff is serious about its work. Since the Bulletin's birth 11 years ago, it has grown from a mimeographed newsletter to a sharp tabloid of 24 or so pages, neatly packaged with modern graphics. Its content also has evolved. ``We're a small town with some fairly large problems,'' said editor Mark Zuckerman. ``We have some big decisions that have to be made.'' Reporters still write stories about matters such as the geese camping out at the town's only gas station. But they also pay close attention to issues facing the little town. Decisions must be made on how to pay for a revised sewer plan and school repairs. The Bulletin reports on the possibilities and the residents take to the opinion columns. ``We've become a little more hard-newsy,'' Mrs. Socholitzky said recently. ``There are a lot of problems in town in that some people want to see it grow and some don't.'' There are about 600 acres of city-owned farmland in the path of developers, and residents are debating whether to sell to help pay for some of the needed improvements. ``Some people think if we let in the developers we can double the population and bring in some money,'' Zuckerman said. ``Some people don't think that's such a great idea.'' That keeps Bob Clark busy on his planning board beat. ``I've always just had a desire to stay involved in the affairs of the community, '' he said. ``It gets to be a bit of a drain because you have to keep up with it, going to meetings and so on, but it's worth it.'' Clark said his ``real'' job, deputy director of the state division of investigation, precludes him from political involvement, but the Bulletin provides an outlet. ``Occasionally someone will question the objectivity of a hard news story, but I chalk that up to them not getting their favorite quote printed,'' he said. The newspaper is as unusual as the town's history. Roosevelt, named after the president whose New Deal financed its founding, was established by immigrant Jews who moved here from New York. Garment workers would make coats in the winter for sale in a cooperative factory and grow their own food in the summer. The experiment in socialism failed after three years but the town remained. Like most of the newspaper staffers, Clark and Mrs. Socholitzky don't have journalism backgrounds. Reporters write their stories and then have them edited in an office owned by Zuckerman's company. Zuckerman takes care of the graphics on a computer. For Mrs. Socholitzky, editing is of paramount importance. ``I took a two-year hiatus once, but I had to come back because I wasn't satisfied with the quality of the editing,'' she said. ``I'm a purist grammatically.'' And she's picky. Mrs. Socholitzky once discovered a grammatical error on a list of ingredients of a baby food company's product. ``I wrote to them and said I didn't want to raise a baby on a baby food with a split infinitive in it,'' she said. ``They wrote back and said they had already printed thousands of labels, but would correct their error on the next printing. And they did.'' 
Outgoing U.S. Ambassador Vernon A. Walters says U.N. peacemaking successes last year _ ending wars in Afghanistan, the Iran-Iraq war and Angola _ are unprecedented in the annals of the world body. These successes and warming U.S.-Soviet relations have made the United Nations ``a better place for the United States to do business,'' Walters said in a farewell interview. The former deputy head of the Central Intelligence Agency said the U.S. view of the world body, once hostile and disdainful, has changed to appreciation. ``If properly handled,'' Walters said, ``the U.N. can be advantageous in promoting our goals of peace, prosperity and freedom.'' ``If it didn't exist, it would have to be invented.'' He spoke as the General Assembly concluded its 43rd session, a dazzling year of achievements. It was the year of the Nobel Peace Prize for U.N. peacekeeping operations, the farewell speech by President Reagan, the U.N. debut of Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev and a move to Geneva to hear PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat. Walters, 71, who has served as U.S. permanent representative here since 1985, described what he called an ``extraordinarily successful'' year. ``We got agreements to end the Afghan War, the Persian Gulf War (between Iran and Iraq) and the war in Angola. There is nothing like it in the annals of the United Nations,'' said Walters, who is being succeeded by Thomas Pickering, ambassador to Israel. ``And, God willing,'' Walters said, ``We will shut down the Western Sahara and Cambodia wars very soon.'' Walters refused to disclose his next posting, but diplomats speculated he might be assigned to a European capital. Last month, Angola, Cuba and South Africa signed agreements providing for Namibian independence from South Africa and the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola. A U.N. independence plan for Namibia will be implemented next year and U.N. peacekeepers and observers deployed. Walters also said he believed the United States will pay about $400 million in arrears. He has opposed U.S. withholding of U.N. dues to protest what Washington considers U.N. bias and inefficiency and has urged restoration of full funding. The United Nations is far more effective today than in the past, and anti-U.S. name-calling, which flooded this forum several years ago, is virtually nonexistent. ``We no longer get the `blood-sucking vampires of Wall Street draining the last drop from the toiling masses of the Third World.' That stuff is gone,'' Walters said. He attributed the change almost entirely to the new international environment and improved U.S.-Soviet relations. ``In the old days, if we said it was `black,' the Soviets said it was `white,''' he said. ``That's no longer there and the possibility of playing off East against West has largely disappeared.'' Walters said he gave ``a great deal of the credit to Mr. Gorbachev, who had the courage to make very difficult decisions. He clearly was the one who decided to change the style and content of foreign policy.'' He added, however, that ``a lot of obstacles were created by the Soviet Union through its contrariness and desire to inflict its ideology on others.'' In the last session, Walters said, one of the most important achievements for the United States was the adoption of a budget that prohibits extravagant expenditure and lowers spending. Through U.S. appeals to the U.N. Human Rights Commission, he said, Cuban leader Fidel Castro released 700 prisoners ``he claimed he didn't have.'' Walters defended the evaluation of voting records to determine how often nations side with the United States. ``By and large, the nonaligned are aligned against us,'' he said, referring to the 102-nation Nonaligned Movement. ``Today, the nonaligned give me far more trouble than the Soviet Union and China.'' He said a great deal of the nonaligned vote against the United States is ``for the sheer pleasure of it.'' Walters refused to cite nations, saying not all nonaligned nations were anti-American. On U.S.-Iranian relations, Walters said he saw no immediate prospect of better ties. ``They are at a dead end right now, because if they expect to get anything from us, they have to release those hostages first.'' He said his greatest satisfaction at the United Nations was Iran's acceptance in July of Security Council Resolution 598, which led to the Aug. 20 cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq War and direct peace talks with Iraq. 
Police have said for years that more than 1 million people line up along the 5{-mile route the Tournament of Roses Parade takes annually, but a more scientific count cuts the number in half. The Pasadena Star-News used a formula devised by Al Hibbs, a retired physicist at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, to estimate the number of people attending Monday's gala procession of flower-covered floats. It was the first time in the 100-year-old extravaganza that anyone estimated the crowd size by counting heads, police and Tournament of Roses officials said. Neither group disputed its accuracy. ``The tournament in the past has never really had a scientific way of doing it,'' spokesman Ken Veronda said. ``If the Star-News can come up with a better way, more power to them.'' Hibbs' formula was based on the assumption that at least 18 inches separate spectators and that at least 10 rows of spectators line the sidewalk. Multiplying the estimated number of one row by 10 equaled 387,200. Adding the 125,000 holding tickets to grandstand seats put the total at 512,200. That figure is probably high because people don't usually stand shoulder to shoulder, Hibbs said. ``I packed 'em in like sardines,'' Hibbs said. ``I'm giving every benefit of the doubt to the upper number.'' The crowd estimate of 1 million appears to have started in a newspaper account of the 1928 parade that said, ``Warren R. Flynn, a Santa Fe agent who is an expert at measuring a large assemblage, placed the crowd at 968,000.'' Skepticism about the parade's 1 million-plus attendance figures arose when organizers of the Doo Dah Parade, an offbeat counterpart to the Rose Parade, used head counts to discount official crowd estimates. In 1987, police said 150,000 people attended the parade down the same street the Rose Parade follows, but an estimate made by counting heads in photographs revealed a total of 50,000, said Doo Dah Parade organizer Peter Apanel. 
Senior Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping captured first place in a Beijing bridge tournament for ``old comrades'' last week, a pro-Beijing newspaper reported today. Deng, honorary chairman of the China Bridge Assocation, topped a field of 64 competitors in the sixth annual competition for oldsters Friday and Saturday at the Great Hall of the People, the Wen Wei Po reported. It said the 84-year-old leader was the oldest player. Deng's passion for bridge is well known, and China-watching publications in Hong Kong have even speculated on the political significance of who he chooses as his card partners. Charges that he once took over a train to transport bridge partners was one of the reasons cited when he was purged during the ultra-leftist 1966-76 Cultural Revolution. 
The White House says representatives of the United States and the Palestine Liberation Organization have discussed possible PLO assistance in investigating the airliner bombing over Scotland that took 270 lives. President Reagan says he would be happy to receive any information that PLO chairman Yasser Arafat might offer to help solve the mystery of Pan American Flight 103, which crash Dec. 21 en route from London to New York. Arafat has condemned the bombing. An administration official, speaking on condition he not be identified, said the United States stopped short of formally requesting PLO assistance. Deputy White House Press Secretary Roman Popadiuk said Monday that Robert Pelletreau, the U.S. ambassador to Tunisia, met on Saturday at the U.S. Embassy in Tunis with Hakam Balaoui, the PLO representative in Tunis. Popadiuk said the meeting was requested by Balaoui to introduce himself to Pelletreau. He said it was not a continuation of the contacts, which the United States calls a dialogue, which began with a meeting Dec. 16 between Pelletreau and three members of the PLO executive committee. ``The discussion centered on Middle East issues,'' Popadiuk said. ``The ambassador took the opportunity to mention that the United States would welcome any information the PLO is able to develop concerning the Pan Am tragedy.'' ``This is in line with what we have already publicly stated, and is true for the PLO as well as anyone else who may have information on the bombing,'' he said. The administration official who spoke anonymously said, ``This was not a request for assistance from the PLO.'' The official said Balaoui took note of Pelletreau's comments and told the ambassador he would relay them to Arafat. Earlier Monday, Reagan was asked about reports that Arafat had offered his assistance in the investigation. ``We've not heard from him,'' the president. ``We will be happy to hear from him. If he has anything to tell us, I'm sure he'll tell us.'' The exchange took place as Reagan stepped off Air Force One at Los Angeles International Airport after spending New Year's weekend in the Palm Springs area. He and his wife, Nancy, were then driven to the brick, ranch-style home in the expensive Bel Air section of Los Angeles where they will live after they leave the White House Jan. 20. They are expected to remain behind the high walls of the estate until they return to Washington Thursday, except for an appearance at a $1 million fund-raising event Wednesday night for the Nancy Reagan Center for teen-age drug addicts, to be opened in a renovated hospital in nearby Pomona. 
It was hard to tell the Soviets from the Americans without a scorecard this week as squabbling grew louder over spending huge amounts on a Soviet space shuttle project while other needs go begging. The Communist Party newspaper Pravda said Monday, without giving details of the debate, that some scientists involved in the project joined consumers upset by food and clothing shortages in questioning the value of the program. In the years before scientists here revealed their own shuttle program, they assailed the U.S. project as too costly and of questionable use. Many Soviet scientists said they could gain the same goals with more standard, single-use rockets. Pravda said in a full-page article devoted to the development and testing of the Soviet shuttle that a ``major rethinking and a fierce clash of ideas, concepts and proposals are under way'' even within the space shuttle program. The Soviets successfully launched the space shuttle Buran (Snowstorm) on Nov. 15 on an unmanned 3-hour, 20-minute test flight. ``Tons, speed, heights, automation, and etc.,'' wrote A. Rudenko, a Pravda reader from the Moldavian capital of Kishinev, on Buran. ``But where are the expenditures, the billions of rubles of the national means?'' ``Where is the mutual connection with the people's well-being? How many years has Buran delayed fulfillment of the food program, the output of good- quality shoes, clothes, and the improvement of medical care for Soviet citizens?'' he asked. Pravda said that only a small part of the Soviet shuttle's program has been fulfilled, and the Buran has yet to prove that it can perform useful work in orbit. The newspaper said that the reaction of Soviet citizens to the 1961 launch of cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin was much more positive than the reaction to the space shuttle program, even though people were poorer then. It said the hopes for a better life that people lost during years of corrupt government and a stagnant economy were to blame. The techonological advancements of the shuttle program eventually will work their way into everyday life, however, Pravda said. It lamented, ``We have one pole of exclusively high technology _ Buran _ and a pole of failures, of technological quagmires _ the agro-industrial complex, household goods, shoes, clothes.'' Pravda said ways must be found to connect the two poles. 
He says he is a hard-working chef chasing the American dream. But the U.S. government contends Carmine Esposito is the ``Al Capone of Italy,'' a ruthless mob boss linked to a dozen killings. Esposito, 31, facing a Jan. 13 deportation hearing, is fighting a return to Italy that he says would mean certain death at the hands of mobsters or corrupt law enforcement officials. ``Would the `Al Capone of Italy' come to Chicago and work like a dog? Would he leave behind his protection and his money?'' he demanded in a recent interview from the federal Metropolitan Correctional Center, where he has been held in solitary confinement for 21 months. ``Would the `Al Capone of Italy get up at 4 a.m. each day to go buy meat, to make sausage alone, to deliver it at night ... not have enough time in a day to even wash yourself?'' But the U.S. government has concluded that Esposito is the man named in an extradition request from Italian authorities. The document charges that Esposito ordered or committed 12 killings in Italy from April 1982 through June 1983 while holding a top post in the Nuova Camorra Organizzata, a criminal clan similar to the Mafia that operates in and around Naples, near Esposito's hometown of Acerra, Italy. ``Esposito is big fish,'' said Italian Judge Vicenzo Scolastico, who was involved in the investigation of the organization. ``As a member of the (Camorra's policy-making) Council of Nine, Esposito had people strangled. Some had to dig their own graves before they were shot. Bodies were mutilated or disappeared. ``He is one of the last great Nuova Camorra figures still at large, and if he ever decided to talk, he could cast light on many unsolved crimes,'' Scolastico added in an interview with The Chicago Tribune. Esposito was arrested in March 1987 as he and several employees finished lunch at Bravissimo, the modestly successful restaurant he and his wife opened in May 1986. He also worked as a chef there, and earlier had worked as an auto body repairman, car salesman and sausage-maker. He entered the United States in 1984, had no trouble with the law and appeared to have been what he claimed _ a contented, hard-working immigrant whose sweat earned him a growing business and a home in the suburbs. He earned enough money to send his children to parochial schools. But all that changed with Esposito's arrest. A lengthy court fight drained his resources and forced his family onto public-aid rolls. He also said his prison confinement has worsened a heart condition. ``The authorities make him out to be a one-man crime wave,'' said Esposito's attorney, Philip Parenti, ``and for all that, there is not one eyewitness, one photograph, one fingerprint. ``There is not one piece of corroborating evidence, except for the pentiti.'' ``Pentiti,'' which literally means ``penitent'' but has taken on the more pedestrian definition ``informant.'' Assistant U.S. Attorney Thomas Scorza argued that even though some informants' criminal histories might raise questions, those matters are best addressed in Italian courts. The U.S. government does not have to prove Esposito's innocence or guilt, Scorza said. ``Besides,'' he said, ``the witnesses almost always are (informants) in gangster cases. And in this instance, the people pointing at him are saying, `I did it with him.' ``They're not doing it to save their necks. They're confessing to the crimes as well.'' Esposito admits to having known Camorra members while working at his father's auto body shop in Acerra, to fixing their getaway cars and on at least one occasion, to sawing off the barrels of shotguns. His refusal to join the Camorra, he said, resulted in harassment by Italian police, and later in his decision to pack up his family and run. He left Acerra and spent the next three years in several Italian cities _ Caserta, then Rome and Milan, before heading for the United States. ``In Italy, the Camorra have so much influence with the government and with police, there is no way to be safe,'' he said. ``Always I think, `If only I am successful to reach the United States, it will be different. ``Now,'' he concluded, ``I am not so sure.'' 
Part of the tail section of Pan Am Flight 103 and other wreckage has been found in remote moorland 15 miles east of this Scottish town, and Canadian experts have joined the crash investigation. The discoveries of wreckage made Monday near the village of Langholm and other finds made in previous days meant searchers had located just 20 percent of the aircraft, which was destroyed by a bomb. ``The area is very rough terrain and there has been no confirmation yet from the accident investigators about what parts of the aircraft are there (other than the tail part),'' local police superintendent Angus Kennedy said. All 259 people aboard the New York-bound flight died when a bomb smuggled onto the Boeing 747 blew it apart over Lockerbie on Dec. 21. Authorities have found three of the 11 people presumed to have died on the ground. Kennedy said no bodies were recovered Monday, but that the body of passenger Ingrid Smith of Britain was among 13 identified that day. Her husband, Capt. Bruce Smith, a Pan Am pilot, accused local police during the weekend of being ``paralyzed by inexperience and incompetence'' and of delaying the return of victims' bodies to their relatives. Area police chief John Boyd said he sympathized with bereaved relatives, but ``every effort'' was being made to positively identify the victims and return them to their families. He said Monday that 81 of the 242 recovered bodies have been released. ``The trauma and grief experienced by relatives continues to be uppermost in our minds.'' Pan Am's senior representative at the crash site, Robert Gould, vice president for operations, said the police had been ``thoroughly professional.'' Members of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, which investigated the suspicious 1985 crash of an Air-India jumbo jet, joined the investigation Monday, said Superintendent Pat Cummings of Ottawa. An Indian government inquiry concluded that the crash off Ireland, in which 329 people died, was caused by a bomb, probably placed on board in Canada where the flight originated. A similar inquiry by Canadian aviation authorities reached no firm conclusion but suggested that evidence points to a bomb. The Flight 103 investigation is focused on the Lockerbie crash site, Frankfurt Airport and London's Heathrow Airport. The flight originated on a Boeing 727 in Frankfurt and, following a stop in Heathrow, left for New York on the jumbo jet. U.S. officials say no group has offered a credible claim of responsibility for the attack. Speculation on suspects has focused mostly on Palestinian extremists opposed to Palestine Liberation Organization chief Yasser Arafat's Middle East peace initiative. FBI Director William Sessions said Sunday that he welcomed any information Arafat could provide in identifying suspects. The London weekly newspaper the Sunday Express reported without attribution Sunday that Arafat had vowed to dispatch an assassination squad to hunt down and kill the bomber. Les Jardine, spokesman for the regional council that governs Lockerbie, said council officials would meet soon with residents of the village to discuss plans to rebuild what was destroyed by falling wreckage and burning fuel. Ten houses were destroyed, a crater 100 feet long by 30 feet deep where they once stood, and another 30 homes were badly damaged. 
Findlay College President Kenneth Zirkle spends his days at school and his nights at prison. But he's no criminal. Zirkle teaches an introduction to business course to 24 inmates at the Allen County Correctional Institution. He helped set up classes at the western Ohio prison, and at the nearby Lima Correctional Institution, to give inmates an opportunity to earn a college degree while on the inside. ``I have been involved in higher education for a long time, but this is one of the most exciting ventures that I have ever been in,'' Zirkle said. ``I think that, pragmatically, many of them see this as looking good on a resume as they go before a parole board seeking to be released from prison,'' he said. ``Secondly, and which I think is more pervasive, is the fact that most of these people really are committed to trying to better themselves,'' he said. ``Most of the time, if you talk to them, they can tell you why they are there and they can tell you what led to it. They are very fearful of going back.'' The classes were established 4{ years ago at the maximum-security prisons. ``We went in with certain stipulations, obviously, that we would not be offering all programs. For example, it does not make a lot of sense to offer teacher's education there because when the person is no longer incarcerated, it is almost impossible to get a job in public education with a prison record. ``So what we tried to do is offer those areas of our program that would have the most interest with the inmates, and, from a very pragmatic society standpoint, would enable these people to come out and be productively employed,'' he said. Zirkle and his staff put together a curriculum that offers associate degrees in business areas like accounting and computer science and in the humanities. ``We have a pretty broad spectrum of programs that are offered. When we started we thought we would have 40 or 50 students involved, and the next thing we know we have 200 involved in a full-time basis,'' he said. Inmates have to take 12 hours of courses. About 35 professors have volunteered to help, he said. ``There are no part-time students. They either take full-time or we are not involved with them,'' he said. Helping inmates redirect their lives was not a new for Zirkle. He put three ex-prisoners in high-level jobs while he was coordinator of residence halls at Penn State University in the early 1970s. Most inmates are good students who have never been given the chance, he said. Their drive and willingness to learn is impressive, he said, and learning they can succeed in college gives them the confidence and hope that they can turn their lives around. 
Authorities charged a 22-year-old ferry captain with negligent homicide after the boat, overcrowded with New Year's travelers, sank off the Caribbean coast. Sixty-seven people drowned and 14 were missing. Officials said 46 people survived the sinking of the ferry Justo Rufino Barrios II in Amatique Bay on Guatemala's east coast Sunday. Juan Pablo Ezquibel was arrested after authorities determined that about 120 people were aboard the 30-ton ferry, which was authorized to carry 90, said Capt. Anibal Giron Arreola, second-in-command at the Puerto Barrios naval base. He said by telephone that the ferry ran out of fuel midway on a 16-mile run across the bay from Livingston to Puerto Barrios and sank after a naval patrol boat tried to tow it to port. Officials had yet to determine the exact cause of the sinking, but Giron Arreola said the ferry captain was slow to respond to requests by the skipper of the naval patrol boat to take control of the ferry's wheel once it was under tow. He said the patrol boat captain believed the ferry's rudder was unmanned while under tow. Esquibel radioed that he had taken the wheel just as the boat began to capsize, Giron Arreola said. Giron Arreola also said that passengers ran to one side of the ferry while it was under tow just before the ferry sank. ``It appears the boat rode a wave and that as it was leaning the people ran to one side out of fear,'' he said. Although seas were only 1-to-1{ feet, passengers were not used to traveling by sea, he said. No Americans were on board, he said. A morgue official said 13 bodies were identified. Navy patrol boats, fishing vessels and other private craft searched for the missing Monday. Puerto Barrios, 187 miles northeast of Guatemala City, the capital, is Guatemala's main east coast port. There are no roads to Livingston and most travel along the coast is by boat. The Rufino Barrios Maritime Transport firm owns the ferry and operates two other ferries along the Livingston-Puerto Barrios route. 
In making their wedding plans, Rhonda Hufford and Todd Kellermann chose musicians, pink dresses and gray tuxedos. And they were tested for AIDS under a year-old law some officials say isn't worth the cost. The nation's only premarital AIDS testing law may not be a law much longer, primarily because, like the Kellermanns, the overwhelming majority of those tested have shown no signs of the AIDS virus. Illinois' mandatory testing program took effect Jan. 1, 1988. But only 23 of the 150,000 people tested in the first 11 months were found to be infected with the virus, the state Department of Public Health said. That's about one in 6,500 tested. The cost of the AIDS test in Illinois, including the doctor's visit, ranges from $25 to $125 per person, said state Health Department spokesman Tom Schafer. Based on a ``conservative'' $35 per test average, the cost of finding each of the 23 infected people came to more than $228,000, he said. Still, to receive a marriage license for their June wedding, Kellermann and Ms. Hufford, a nursing student, had to show the Macon County Clerk's office a certificate verifying they had been tested. ``I'm easygoing about it,'' said Kellerman, a 22-year-old Springfield computer analyst. ``As long as they make it a law, there's not much you can do about it.'' But the law has resulted in a 25 percent drop in the number of marriage license applications in Illinois, state Public Health Director Bernard Turnock said. Hundreds of Illinois couples have gone to bordering states to tie the knot. ``They don't want to take the AIDS test,'' said Janet Hudacek of the Lake County, Ind., clerk's office, which has seen a six-fold increase in the number of Illinois residents seeking marriage licenses. ``Mostly it's the cost.'' To the north, in Kenosha County, Wis., officials are selling more marriage licenses to Illinoisans than to Wisconsin residents. Through Dec. 8, they said, 1,073 Illinois couples got married in Kenosha County _ 51 percent of all licenses issued. The previous year, 58 Illinois couples were married there of 1,021 licenses issued, said Michelle Riley, a clerk in the county offices. Because the number of people with AIDS infections detected through premarital testing is so low and the cost so high, Turnock plans to recommend to Republican Gov. James R. Thompson that the law be scrapped. Democratic state Rep. Grace Mary Stern, who was rebuffed this spring in efforts to dump the testing law, has filed legislation for this session to end the testing. But Republican Rep. Penny Pullen said repealing the law would send a message that Illinois no longer sees AIDS as a serious problem. ``This program is giving thousands of Illinois couples the good news that they are not infected,'' she said. ``In this society, with its current mores, that can be very good news indeed, and yet it's very unlikely that couples would demand the test of each other if the state did not demand it.'' Illinois is the only state with a premarital AIDS testing law. Louisiana repealed its version of the law last year. ``I think other states are still looking at doing it but I doubt they will because they're finding really it's not very cost effective,'' said Tracey Hooker, a staff associate at the National Conference of State Legislatures in Denver. AIDS, or acquired immune deficiency syndrome, destroys the body's defenses against disease, leaving a person prey to life-threatening infections and certain cancers. The AIDS virus is believed to be passed mainly through sexual intercourse, shared hypodermic needles and from infected mothers to their infants before or during birth. 
Top-ranked Notre Dame defeated No. 3 West Virginia 34-21 in the Fiesta Bowl to give the Fighting Irish their eighth national championship in college football and the first since 1977. Notre Dame's Tony Rice, a junior, threw for two touchdowns and a career-high 213 yards as the Irish finished the season undefeated at 12-0. In other bowl games Monday, No. 11 Michigan upset No. 5 Southern California 22-14 in the Rose Bowl; No. 9 UCLA beat No. 8 Arkansas 17-3 in the Cotton Bowl; and No. 13 Clemson edged No. 10 Oklahoma 13-6 in the Citrus Bowl. Seventeenth-ranked Syracuse defeated No. 16 Louisiana State 23-10 in the Hall of Fame Bowl; No. 2 Miami defeated No. 6 Nebraska 23-3 in the Orange Bowl; and No. 4 Florida State defeated No. 7 Auburn 13-7 in the Sugar Bowl. Notre Dame's victory assured it of the top spot in the final Associated Press poll. Rice completed seven of 11 passes, including a 29-yard scoring strike to Raghib Ismail late in the second quarter and a 3-yard pass to Frank Jacobs early in the fourth quarter. West Virginia, which finished 11-1, had to be satisified with the first 11-victory season in its 96-year football history. 
A woman who recovered the $65,000 in cash she had left behind in her hotel room didn't even thank the two maids who turned the money in, hotel officials said. Cathy Dean and Paula Vaughan found the money in a shoe box Saturday while cleaning a suite at the Residence Inn. ``As a child, I went to church every Sunday,'' said Ms. Vaughan, 26. ``I was taught that if you find something that doesn't belong to you, you turn it in. ``It makes you feel good, like the glow you get after you give birth to a baby,'' she said. Ms. Dean, 36, said she was shocked at finding the money. ``I about passed out,'' she said. ``I held onto it real tight as we took it back to the front desk.'' A woman who had checked out earlier in the day returned Saturday evening to claim the money, said hotel general manager Linda Catalina. She refused to identify the woman, and said hotel officials did not question the guest about why she carried so much cash. Police had no plans to investigate the source of the cash, either, said detective Sgt. Harold Moore. ``It's the lady's money as far as we know,'' Moore said Monday. ``She could have sold a house and been taking the money to a bank.'' Laura Butkovic, another hotel manager, said the guest did not offer the maids a reward when she returned. In fact, she appeared so relieved about recovering the money she apparently forgot to thank them, she said. But the hotel will not forget the act of honesty. Ms. Catalina said she contacted the Residence Inn's headquarters in Washington, D.C., to report it. She said the maids will receive some sort of reward. ``It's employees like these who make our guests feel safe,'' she said. 
A 17-year-old Czechoslovak hockey player who wants to play in the National Hockey League missed his team's flight home and was believed to be seeking asylum, Canadian hockey officials said. Peter Nedved, the offensive star of an international hockey tournament, disappeared Monday from a home where he had been staying and missed the flight that took his colleagues back to Czechoslovakia. ``He is currently in the hands of the immigration people,'' Ted Taylor, organizer of the Mac's Midget Hockey Tournament, said Monday night. ``I'm assuming he maybe has asked for it (asylum) by now.'' Immigration authorities could not immediately be reached for comment, and a spokesman for the External Affairs Department in Ottawa said he had no information about Nedved. Taylor said he had no idea whether the 6-foot-2, 165-pound forward will be allowed to remain in Canada. But he has had several calls from members of Calgary's strong Czechoslovak community offering help. Nedved said in a weekend interview that he wanted to return to Canada as a visitor but would ``prefer to play here.'' He led the tournament in scoring and the team from his town of Litvinov won the event. ``I would say he was the rave of the tournament. Everybody was talking about him,'' Taylor said. In a weekend interview, Nedved said he hoped to play for the Czechoslovak national team and the NHL. ``I don't plan that far ahead,'' he said with a smile. ``But I'll be able to give you a better answer in five years.'' Nedved's father played on Czechoslovakia's national team as did an older brother before being drafted into the army. That fate would await Peter in Czechoslovakia. Nedved's team had been in Calgary since Dec. 10, and he was staying in a southwest Calgary home along with a Canadian player. He was last seen by his hosts just after midnight Sunday as he slept on a couch. The athlete left the home early Monday, taking only his hockey equipment with him, Taylor said. The organizer tried to reach the team's coaches, but they were already on their way to the airport. Taylor contacted the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. He said police told him Nedved ``would be looked after. It was out of my hands.'' Taylor said Nedved apparently does not know English very well because he had a Canadian friend telephone girls for him, including Taylor's 18-year-old daughter. 
A strong earthquake was recorded today off the southern tip of Japan near the Ryukyu islands of Yaku and Tanega, the Royal Observatory reported. The quake, which measured an estimated 5.5 on the Richter scale, was recorded at 12:45 p.m. (11:45 p.m. EST Monday) and was centered about 100 miles south-southeast of the Japanese city of Kagoshima, the observatory said in a statement. Observatory reports never mention whether there may have been casualties. The Richter scale is a gauge of energy released by an earthquake as measured on a seismograph. Every increase of one number means the ground motion is 10 times greater. A quake of magnitude 5 can cause considerable damage in populated areas while a magnitude 6 quake can cause severe damage. 
A woman and her three children suffocated in the back of a pickup truck as the family was driving home from Mexico, unaware carbon monoxide fumes were seeping into the camper shell, officials said. The children, ages 3-6, and their mother were found unconscious Monday at the Calexico Port of Entry when her husband pulled up to the border station following a three- to four-hour wait, said police Sgt. Bill Matus. The discovery prompted officials to check other cars, and two children were found unconscious in the back of another pickup truck. They were taken to a hospital, where they remained today for observation. U.S. Customs Service officials identified the dead as Micaela Iniguez Aguilar, 26; and her children, Horacio Aguilar, 6, Francisco Javiar Aguilar, 4, and Camilio Aguilar, 3. The father, Horacio Aguilar, 36, was unhurt and was unaware the fumes were seeping into the truck, Matus said. Inspectors and paramedics tried to revive the four, but they were pronounced dead on arrival at a hospital here. The pickup truck had a faulty exhaust system and the bed had holes in it, allowing carbon monoxide to seep into the back, said John Miller, a Customs Service spokesman. He said the family, all Mexican nationals, were returning home to the San Joaquin Valley town of Laton after a holiday visit to Mexicali. Holiday traffic caused a massive backup at the border station about 100 miles east of San Diego. Matus estimated traffic was delayed three to four hours and, ``that could have contributed to the whole thing.'' Miller declined comment on the delays except to say that all eight lanes at the border station were open. Matus said that when the family encountered the backup, the mother moved from the cab to the back to check on the children. Shortly after the first discovery, Mexican border agents went car by car to warn motorists in line about carbon monoxide dangers. They discovered Angelica Ortega, 11, and Armando Ortega, 12, of Niland, Calif., unconscious in the back of another pickup, also covered. The children were revived and taken to a hospital, Customs spokeswoman Bobbie Cassidy said. 
Now that President-elect Bush has nearly filled his Cabinet, his next major challenge is to fashion a legislative package that he can push through a Democratic-controlled Congress. The problem of the nation's budget deficit looms as the overriding test for Bush, but his aides also are looking to move legislation on issues that Bush stressed during his campaign, including childcare, education, the environment and ethics. The Bush team has said the budget deficit will take priority, and much of his legislative program will depend on the fiscal package he is able to work out with Congress. ``We'd have to have the framework first for dealing with the budget,'' said Craig Fuller, the Bush transition co-director. But he said Bush will still pursue commitments he made during his campaign. That would mean legislative proposals in such areas as environment, childcare and education. In the area of government ethics, where President Reagan vetoed a package from Capitol Hill last fall, Bush said recently that he will send an ethics bill to Congress ``very, very early.'' In his proposals on lobbying by government officials after they've left office, Bush applies the same standards to Congress as to executive branch workers, said Boyden Gray, who will serve as Bush's White House legal counsel. As his budget team toils over the the fiscal framework they will take into congressional negotiations, small groups of aides are working on that and other building blocks of the Bush agenda. Research teams headed by Jim Pinkerton, head of policy development for Bush's transition operation, have gathered data from cabinet departments including synopses of measures pending in Congress and issues seen as key in the new congressional session. Much of the ``serious policy analysis'' on the Bush legislative package is expected to occur early in January, said Robert Teeter, co-director of Bush's transition team. The early proposals are expected to center on a domestic agenda, stressing the ``kinder, gentler'' approach to government that Bush discussed during the campaign. Spending proposals _ such as his plan to expand Medicaid coverage _ ultimately will hinge on how the budget negotiations turn out. For instance, Bush's commitment to the tough anti-drug stance he took during the campaign could be tested in talks on financing the massive new anti-drug legislation Congress passed this fall. The bill calls for $2.7 billion in new spending, but Congress initially appropriated only $976 million. But other items, such as the ethics package, don't have a significant pricetag. One idea is to stress presidential leadership on projects that don't involve large sums of money, such as an international conference Bush has proposed to deal with the problem of global warming of the atmosphere from carbon dioxide. Bush wants a revised clean-air bill, and said in the campaign the nation must have ``a clear commitment to emissions reductions on a clear timetable.'' He said he will work with Congress ``on the exact amounts and exact methodology'' to reduce nitrogen oxide and sulpher dioxide emissions. On one of the acid-rain sticking points, Bush proposes burden sharing of the costs among ratepayers nationwide rather than just in the polluting regions. The Clean Air Act has been up for renewal every year this decade, but Congress has been unable to agree on the provision dealing with acid rain. ``There will be a long negotiation on acid rain and clean air authorization,'' predicted Bush adviser Bob Grady. Environmentalists also are waiting to see how the Bush team handles some of the regulatory aspects of environmental protection and cleanup, a subject on which the Reagan administration was heavily criticized. Another controversial topic is offshore oil drilling. Congress, in an ad hoc approach, has tacked on a drilling prohibition for the California coast, for example, when passing appropriations for the Interior Department each year. Bush, a former oilman, has shied away from blanket bans, saying he will look at the drilling situation on a tract-by-tract basis. Bush also emphasized education issues during the campaign. His proposals include a $500 million merit schools program, $50 million for magnet schools, and $50 million for programs in teaching reform and innovation. He also promised to push for a big increase in Head Start funding, to extend it to all eligible 4-year-olds. Bush during the campaign pledged a childcare plan, to include a government refund for childcare expenses for the poor, with a $1,000 tax credit per child under age 4. Differences between Bush's childcare plan and versions offered by Congress are expected to spark a battle. The new president also will send Congress his plan for YES, or Youth Entering Service to America. It calls for $100 million to match private sector grants for young people to volunteer in community service programs. 
A 22-year-old woman was seen walking on a beach minutes after she jumped more than 200 feet from the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, authorities said. Maria Bertoline jumped Monday morning from the bridge, which connects Staten Island and Brooklyn, and was taken to St. Vincent's Medical Center with a possible broken spine, said a police spokesman, Sgt. Raymond O'Donnell. Bertoline was listed in guarded condition early today with fractures and was under observation, said a nursing supervisor who would not identify herself or comment further. Housing Authority police officers driving across the bridge spotted Bertoline, wearing a nightgown, on the opposite side of the span, but by the time they turned around, she had jumped. ``About four or five minutes after she jumped, we saw her walking along the beach at Fort Wadsworth,'' said Officer Martin McKeon. ``We couldn't believe it.'' Bertoline's father, Joseph, said his daughter had been under treatment for depression and had ``boyfriend problems.'' 
British businessman Thomas Loel Evelyn Bulkeley Guinness, a former aviator and member of Parliament, has died at age 82. Guinness suffered a heart attack at his Acapulco, Mexico, home Friday, went to Houston for treatment and died Saturday, relatives and a hospital spokeswoman said. Guinness, whose family made its fortune in banking and is related to the Guinness brewery dynasty, was in the House of Commons from 1931 to 1945. He was one of the first people in Britain to own a plane, and later commanded a squadron of fighter planes during World War II. In 1944, he was promoted to wing commander. After the war, he inherited a fortune from his father and for a time was president of the former British United Airways. Guinness had been at his home near the sea in Acapulco, when he had a heart attack, son William Guinness said here Monday. The elder Guinness had often been under the care of Houston heart specialist Dr. Michael DeBakey, his son said. ``He was a very private man,'' William Guinness said. ``He was a very fine gentleman. He was 82 and getting old, but it did come as quite a surprise.'' Guinness had a home in the Swiss city of Lausanne but spent much of his time in the United States, his son said. A funeral was scheduled for today in Houston, and burial Friday in Lausanne. Guinness is also survived by a daughter, Lady Dufferin, and several grandchildren. 
Two barges carrying 33,600 tons of oil caught fire and exploded on the Yangtze River, blocking traffic along China's longest waterway, official news reports said today. The People's Daily said the fire occurred about 50 miles upstream from Wuhan, the capital of Hubei Province. It said the barges, part of a fleet belonging to the Nanking-Yangtze Oil Shipping Co., were set adrift after the lead boat ran aground early Sunday. Fires started on both barges and the boats exploded shortly before 9 a.m. The crew abandoned the main boat after it beached and there were no reports of casualties. The daily said fire spread across the width of the fire-slicked river where the two explosions took place. The cause of the fires is still under investigation. 
The centennial Rose Parade bloomed with love as Southern California's Most Romantic Couple exchanged vows on a flower-bedecked float as an audience worthy of Prince Charles and Princess Diana watched. Monday's Tournament of Roses parade also featured the return of Shirley Temple Black as grand marshal after a 50-year absence, a reunion of Rose Queens, 275 horses, 20 marching bands, and 60 floats decorated with more than 20 million flowers. In Dallas, mimes, clowns, mascots and 650 pompon dancers took part in the 32nd annual Cotton Bowl Parade. On a float fitted with an orchid-covered gazebo and dubbed ``Romance in California,'' Ron Simms and Carie Humphries were wed before hundreds of thousands of spectators and a TV audience officials estimated at up to 350 million in 32 countries. By comparison, the 1981 wedding of Prince Charles and Lady Diana was seen by about 650 million worldwide. ``This is like a fairy tale come true,'' said Simms, 23. ``It's a chance to show everybody what true love is about.'' The couple was selected from thousands who entered The Search for the Most Romantic Couple in Southern California contest. Other floats carried children fighting cancer and a Vietnamese refugee who made a harrowing escape by boat in 1980. Mrs. Black, who last served as grand marshal in 1939 when she was the 10-year-old child star Shirley Temple, led the parade despite a recent admission that she is allergic to roses. ``Dark red roses cause me a problem. No other roses do,'' she said, adding that she is already campaigning for a third stint as grand marshal. Rose Queen Charmaine Beth Shryock reigned with her court on a float followed by one reuniting many former Rose Queens, including 80-year-old Holly Halsted Balthis from 1930. The parade began in 1890 as a hunt club that entertained residents of the Los Angeles suburb with rose petal-covered horse and buggy teams. Police in previous years have estimated the crowd size at about 1 million, but this year declined, saying the number was too difficult to arrive at. The Pasadena Star-News, conducting its own head count, estimated the number of spectators as 500,000. The crowd was described as well-behaved. There were 188 arrests, mostly for drunkenness, compared with 444 last year, said parade spokesman Ken Veronda. 
About 200 Chinese students demonstrated in Beijing today against ``hooliganism'' and for women's rights after an African man allegedly accosted a Chinese woman in her dormitory. The protest march and a subsequent class boycott marked the third time since Dec. 24 that tensions between Chinese and Africans have provoked fights or demonstrations in China. Last week, thousands of Chinese in Nanking demonstrated against African students following a Christmas Eve fight that began when the Africans tried to bring Chinese women into a dance. In Hangzhou, 56 African students have been boycotting classes for a week. They say Chinese authorities have accused them of having AIDS. Chinese authorities in Nanking today said four African students have been expelled for participating in the Christmas Eve brawl at Hehai University in the east-central city. At least one has been arrested and the other three detained for questioning. The officials denied African allegations that Chinese paramilitary forces beat and used electric truncheons to shock African students during a clash Saturday in a guest house outside Nanking where the blacks had been sequestered _ supposedly for their own safety _ for nearly a week. In Beijing today, Chinese students at the Beijing Languages Institute held a two-hour march, carrying banners saying, ``Hooligans Go Home,'' ``Protect Women's Rights,'' and ``We Demand A Safe Campus,'' eight participants said. Chinese students said 2,000 students later boycotted classes. The students said they wanted their school to fix locks on dormitory doors, provide better lighting and upgrade security. They said they wanted foreign students ``to respect Chinese customs.'' The incident in Beijing occurred early Sunday when a Chinese woman went to the bathroom and was accosted by an African student in her third floor dormitory hall, Chinese and foreign students said. A roommate of the woman said the African followed her classmate into the bathroom and asked her to leave the building with him. To buy time, she agreed and told him to wait downstairs. The African then sneaked into the woman's room, her roommate said. When the woman returned, the African attempted to grab her but she screamed and ran down the stairs. On the second floor she slipped on broken glass and severely cut her leg, Chinese students said. ``I saw him run after her,'' said the roommate, who was awoken by her roommates' cries. ``She was yelling, `Save me! save me!''' She said her roommate could not speak to an Associated Press reporter because ``all she can do is cry.'' African students at the languages institute said they did not know exactly what happened on Sunday morning. They said they believed Chinese were using the incident as an excuse to oppose relationships between foreign men and Chinese women. Relations between Chinese and Africans are tense. Chinese are often openly racist and Africans are frustrated by a culture that is very different from their own. The tensions become explosive when Chinese women are involved. In Nanking, Su Xiaoxun, an official at the Jiangsu province foreign affairs office, denied allegations by African students and diplomats that Chinese forces attacked and tortured Africans at a guest house on Saturday. The Benin Embassy's first secretary, Gobo Bio Mamah, reported allegations that Chinese militia stripped students and administered electric shocks as torture during Saturday's attack. Daouda Diakite, a 24-year-old student from Mali, said Chinese militia shocked his classmates around their genitals. The 140 mostly African students had been forced to the guest house on Dec. 26 following the African-Chinese clash and anti-black protests during which thousands of youths threw rocks and destroyed property at African dormitories. In Nanking, Alex Dzabaku Dosoo of Ghana has been arrested in connection with the Christmas Eve clash. A Benin student, Ludovic Dossoumon, was sentenced without trial to 15 days in prison as ``punishment,'' diplomats say. 
No one seems to want Dale Aupperle's job. The situation is so bad that each of the nearly 400 households in this Macon County community of 1,000 will soon receive instructions on how to get on April 4's ballot for village president. Aupperle, 37, is completing a four-year term and would like to be replaced. But with the deadline for filing candidacy petitions only two weeks away, no one has bothered to enter. Village Clerk Cheryl Lehman this week will mail the requirements for filing nominating petitions to each household, for the job of president or trustee. Aupperle asked Lehman to make the special mailing after Monday's village board meeting was canceled for lack of quorum. He said he doesn't really want to give up the village post, but demands on his time are increasing and will only get worse. ``I'm the first vice president of the American Society of Farm Managers and Rural Appraisers,'' said Aupperle, senior vice president of the Magna Trust Co.'s Farm Management Department. 
Archie R. Boe, former president of Sears, Roebuck and Co. and Allstate Insurance Co., has died of cancer at age 67. Boe, who joined Allstate in 1941 and worked for the insurance company or its parent, Sears, until retirement in 1984, died Monday at Northwestern Memorial Hospital. ``He was one of the first corporate executives to adapt long-range planning, known as strategic planning, into the corporate world,'' said Ray Ewing, a former Allstate spokesman who worked with Boe for 20 years. ``He had a good sense of foresight and planning that was really unique.'' Known mostly as a car insurer, Allstate expanded into other areas of coverage in 1957 under Boe's leadership. ``That's the reason Allstate is so big today,'' Ewing said. Boe was named Allstate president in 1966, and chairman and chief executive officer in 1972. In 1982 he was named president of Sears, a post he held for two years. Boe was born in Estherville, Iowa. He graduated from Drake University in 1941 with a finance degree. He earned a master's degree in business from the University of Chicago, was inducted into the Chicago Business Hall of Fame in 1987, and served on several corporate boards. Survivors include his wife, Elaine; son, Michael; stepson, Dr. James Day; and stepdaughters Constance Day and Randee Gregos. 
A streamlined Christian Science Monitor with color photographs, fewer pages and less advertising was redesigned to save time for readers of the 80-year-old newspaper, its editors say. Concern over the new appearance, which started with today's editions, and other changes prompted an exodus in November of top management at the church-run daily newspaper, including the departure of Pulitzer Prize-winning editor Katherine Fanning. But the changes in the 80-year-old newspaper, which has lost money for years, were based on five years of reader research, news executives said Monday. ``Readers told us that because of the demands on their time, they want greater selectivity in topics covered by the Monitor, more concise articles and a design and layout that helps them absorb the paper's editorial content,'' John H. Hoagland Jr., manager of the Christian Science Publishing Society said Monday in a statement. ``In short, they continue to look to the Monitor for the context and perspective of events, and want a serious paper that can be read thoroughly in about 30 minutes.'' The weekday newspaper with a circulation of about 170,000 is still tabloid shaped. But it will be 20 pages, smaller by about eight pages than its previous format. This was accomplished by keeping national advertising to two pages and eliminating local and classified ads. In addition, the newspaper's staff of 160 is among the 800 members of the publishing society and broadcasting operation due for cutbacks of 20 percent to 25 percent, said spokesman Don Feldheim. 
``In the old days, if we said it was `black,' the Soviets said it was `white.' That's no longer there and the possibility of playing off East against West has largely disappeared.'' _ Outgoing U.S. Ambassador Vernon A. Walters to the United Nations in a farewell interview. 
``After taking statements from survivors, we can see something was not right. I believe someone will go to jail for this.'' _ Precinct Police Chief Irineu Barroso, who is in charge of investigating the New Year's Eve capsizing of a sightseeing boat that killed at least 51 people in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 
``You can make it. If Jim and Tammy can survive their holocaust of two years, I know God will help you to survive.'' _ PTL founder Jim Bakker, returning to the TV pulpit with his wife for the first time in two years. 
U.S. war veterans seeking the release of colleagues they claim are being held in Laos said today that they are offering anti-communist Laotian insurgents $5,000 to destroy a government building. The veterans have formed a ``war council'' and are offering the money for the first significant government building the insurgents destroy, group spokesman Ted Sampley said. ``We believe the only way the truth and any living American prisoner of war will ever be liberated from Laos is if the Pathet Lao (communist party) are driven from Laos,'' he said. ``We're going to encourage (the insurgents) to take on the Pathet Lao any way they can.'' Sampley, who spoke in a telephone interview from the United States, is chairman of the National Steering Committee For Vietnam War Veterans. The private lobbying group has accused the U.S. government of failing to secure the release of Americans held from the Indochina War, which ended with communist victories in Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam in 1975. The Laotian government has repeatedly denied holding any Americans from the war and has reacted angrily to private initiatives. The U.S. government also has criticized these private initiatives, preferring official contacts with the Laotian authorities, whom it says have increased cooperation in recent months. A total of 547 Americans are officially listed as missing in action, or MIA, in Laos, but U.S. officials said all but one are presumed dead. ``If the Reagan administration will encourage private citizens to help the Contras (insurgents in Nicaragua), then by God we can help the Laotians against the Pathet Lao communists,'' said Sampley, a former Green Beret from Kinston, N.C. He said the $5,000 had been donated by a private U.S. citizen but would not identify the person. Insurgents based along the Thai and Chinese borders have fought the Laotian government since the Pathet Lao seized power in December 1975, but do not appear to pose a major security risk. The U.S. government says it gives no support to the insurgents. In October, Sampley led a group of Americans to Thailand. On the Mekong River, which separates Thailand and Laos, they floated currency notes stamped with another reward offer _ $2.4 million to anyone who brings out a live prisoner. Two members of the group were detained by the Laotians for 41 days after they illegally crossed to the Laotian side of the river. Last month, U.S. and Laotian experts conducted their fourth joint excavation of a U.S. warplane crash site in Laos and found one set of human remains. The MIA issue was expected to be discussed during talks this week between Laos' deputy foreign minister, Soubanh Srithirath, and Richard Childress, director of Asian affairs at the U.S. National Security Council. Childress was accompanied on the trip by Ann Mills Griffiths, the head of the National League of POW-MIA Families, a private lobbying group. The official Laotian radio said Soubanh and Childress met in Laos' capital of Vientiane on Monday and were expected to meet again today. ``The consultative meeting proceeded in a good and straightforward atmosphere,'' said a text of Monday's broadcast, which was seen in Bangkok today. 
The Soviet government today denied Western media reports that 17 survivors of the Dec. 7 Armenian earthquake had recently been found in a wrecked bakery, saying the last survivor was rescued 10 days ago. Tass, the official news agency, contradicted French and British broadcast reports that said 17 people had, by eating grain and melted snow, survived in a devastated bakery in the town of Spitak for more than three weeks. ``The Western press reports ... have no foundation,'' Tass quoted Norik Muradyan, chief of rescue operations in the town, as saying today in a telephone interview. ``The last living person was removed by rescuers from the ruins of buildings and structures in Spitak 10 days ago,'' he was quoted as saying. Since Thursday, the bodies of 28 more earthquake victims have been pulled from the rubble, bringing the total of recovered bodies to 24,888, Tass said. In Paris, Europe 1 radio on Monday quoted a nurse for the French humanitarian group Doctors of the World as saying the 17 survivors were found in a bread factory near Spitak, a village in northwestern Armenia, on Wednesday. The nurse, who spoke on condition of anonymity, was quoted as saying they stayed alive by eating grain and drinking melted snow. The London commercial radio station LBC reported that French medics said the 17 were found Saturday. The quake, which left about 400,000 people homeless, leveled Spitak, where 25,000 people had lived. It measured 6.9 on the Richter scale. 
A former prosecutor who claims she was fired for her provocative outfits has declined an offer to pose in Playboy magazine for fear it could lead to disorder in the court. ``If I'm going to have men on a jury, those men probably will have seen me in Playboy, and I don't know if that would color their thinking, or if it would just make them uncomfortable to be in a courtroom with me, or me uncomfortable to be in a courtroom with them,'' Brenda Taylor said Monday. ``We have been talking to her representative,'' said Elizabeth Norris, communications director for Playboy Enterprises in Chicago. ``Nothing has been settled.'' Earlier, Taylor had said she wasn't sure about taking the offer because of how it might affect her chances of getting a law job. Taylor, 25, was dismissed in September from the Broward County State Attorney's Office, where she worked in the County Court division. She mostly handled drunken driving cases. Her firing came two weeks after she filed a discrimination complaint accusing her boss, Assistant State Attorney John Countryman, of saying she looked like a ``bimbo'' and a ``manhunter'' because of the short skirts and tight dresses she wore in the courtroom. Chief Assistant State Attorney Ralph Ray Jr. cited shortcomings in her job performance as the reason for the dismissal. Since leaving the State Attorney's Office, she has been working in private practice handling civil cases from donated office space. 
A retired black schoolteacher who helped resurrect this racially divided town's government has won re-election as mayor in Keysville's first locally supervised election since the Depression. Mayor Emma Gresham, 64, defeated 67-year-old challenger Joseph U. Cochran, who is white, by a vote of 127-61 on Monday as her all-black slate of City Council candidates defeated Cochran's slate of four whites and one black by similar margins. ``I feel that God has blessed us again,'' Mrs. Gresham said. ``This means we can continue for progress in Keysville. People can see the change. They must have, for me to get that many votes.'' The east Georgia town has about 230 registered voters and is 70 percent black. Cochran said he wasn't surprised by the results in light of a ruling earlier Monday by the Burke County Board of Registrars rejecting challenges he had filed against 84 black voters. Cochran contended that the 84 voters, including 35 who live in a newly annexed area, did not live within town boundaries. ``Since the town's boundaries have not been established, I can't see hardly how you can annex more property into it,'' Cochran said. The Washington-based public interest law firm that helped Keysville organize and conduct the election, Christic Institute South, disputed Cochran's contention that the town limits were in question. The institute's attorney, Alan Gregory, said the annexation was cleared in advance by the U.S. Justice Department and approved by the Georgia secretary of state's office. In addition to the 35 voters living in the annexed area, ``they're challenging the same 49 people that were challenged in the last election,'' he said. ``Those were nullified by the registrar at the end of the vote tallies. There is no reason for those people to be challenged again.'' Sixty-three of the challenged voters cast ballots. Cochran said Monday night he had not decided whether to appeal the registrars' decision. Keysville's government was revived in January 1988 when Mrs. Gresham and council members won one-year terms in a contested election. Monday's election was for 20-month terms. Subsequent elections will be for four-year terms under a new charter awaiting approval by the Georgia Legislature. For reasons lost to time, Keysville deactivated its government in 1933. In the 1980s, black residents began a move to reactivate it in order to get municipal water, sewers, fire and police protection, all of which the town lacked. There were problems with defining the boundaries, however, as the original 1890 charter described the city limits as everything within a half-mile radius of a schoolhouse that was demolished around 1895. White residents went to court to block the move to reactivate the government. They denied they were worried about a possible black government, saying they were concerned that installing basic municipal services would tax poor blacks out of their homes. Mrs. Gresham and a council were elected the first time in 1985, but white residents contended in court that since the city limits were not specific, the vote should be thrown out. A state court agreed and issued an order forbidding the Keysville officials from taking office. Opponents used the same argument to try to prevent elections last year, but ultimately lost in federal court. 
A charity that counts Nancy Reagan among its supporters is being investigated because of a report that it misled donors and sometimes gave less than half its donations to AIDS research, officials said. ``It seems that their expenses were enormously high for the amount of money they were giving to the organizations they promised,'' said Lanie Accles, a spokeswoman for state Attorney General Robert Abrams, who has subpoenaed the Creo Society's records. The investigation follows a Dec. 27 Better Business Bureau report, which found, based on the organization's records, that: ``Of 13 events in 1987 and 1988, seven yielded less than 50 percent to charity,'' the bureau's minimum acceptable standard. The bureau's New York Philanthropic Advisory Service, which investigated Creo for four months, said Creo had given it four sets of inconsistent financial statements. Creo, founded in 1983, describes its mission as ``raising funds for charitable purposes, notably for AIDS-related organizations.'' In addition to Mrs. Reagan, supporters of the organization have included U.N. Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar and King Juan Carlos of Spain. The organization, whose name means ``I create'' in Latin and ``I believe'' in Spanish, has sponsored several lavish, high-society benefits, including a production of the musical ``Hair'' at the United Nations last May that was to raise $2 million for ``children affected by AIDS.'' Solicitations for the event were ``particularly unclear and potentially misleading,'' the bureau said. Less than half that amount _ $829,668 _ was raised, about $1,000 under the cost of production, according to Creo's records. Records indicated that $74,000 went to AIDS-related charity, but the organization's president, Marshall Yeager, acknowledged Monday that that figure relied on pledges that have yet to be received. The amount Creo has given to charities from its events ranged from 6 percent of the $15,000 raised at a film benefit last September to 83 percent from a December benefit that raised $2,425,000. Yeager defended the various figures given by Creo to the bureau. ``The figures were different because they wanted things reported in a different way,'' he said. Rhonda Klein Singer, the bureau's executive vice president and general counsel, said she believed Creo should be forced to register with the state as a professional fund-raising organization. 
Rival Shiite Moslem militias blasted each other with grenades, mortars and cannons in Beirut's southern slums all night, and police today said five combatants were killed and seven others wounded. Thousands of residents remained huddled in basements and bomb shelters as the fighting raged into a fourth day, police said. The sound of explosions reverberated across the Lebanese capital as militiamen of the Syrian-backed Amal, Arabic for hope, and the pro-Iranian Hezbollah, or Party of God, battled under parachute flares. Iran had planned to send its deputy foreign minister, Mohammed Javad Larijani, to Beirut to try to attain a cease-fire, according to radio stations in Moslem west Beirut. But Larijani flew to the Soviet Union today, Iran's official Islamic Republic News Agency reported. It was not clear if the trip to Moscow, Syria's main backer, was connected to the fighting in Lebanon. Syria is Lebanon's main power broker and its troops, though in the vicinity of the fighting, have stayed clear. The new casualties brought the toll to 25 killed and 54 wounded in four days of fighting in the slums and on the northern fringe of Israel's self-designated ``security zone'' in south Lebanon. A police spokesman said the two militias fought from house to house in Beirut's Ghobeiri neighborhood after nightfall Monday, when Hezbollah fighters, wearing their trademark black headbands, overran a police station. The fighting in south Beirut and south Lebanon tapered into sniper fire at dawn, said the spokesman, who cannot be named under standing regulations. ``It's not a cease-fire. They're simply tired and need a rest,'' the spokesman said. ``They will be at it again.'' Six cease-fires called by Syrian peacekeeping troops have failed to curb the hostilities. In May, Syria sent 4,500 toops into the slums, a cluster of low-income districts stretching over 16 square miles on Beirut's southern flank. The Syrian intervention came after a three-week bloodbath between Amal and Hezbollah in which nearly 300 people were killed and 1,000 wounded. But both sides clashed again in November. Forty people were killed and 87 wounded in that round of street fighting in west and south Beirut. The Syrians have 7,500 troops in west Beirut in addition to the contingent in the slums. They also maintain about 25,000 troops in northern and eastern Lebanon under a 1976 mandate from the Arab League to halt the Moslem-Christian civil war, now in its 14th year. 
The 68-year-old Ambassador Hotel, a landmark where Charlie Chaplin once lived and where Robert Kennedy was assassinated, checks out its last guest today and closes its doors. Employees and visitors walked the nearly empty lobby Monday as Christmas decorations were taken down. People snapped pictures and swapped memories about the hotel, which had once put up the likes of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and actress Elizabeth Taylor, but which has lost money in recent years. Elvira Bell, a maid, met such stars as Miss Taylor, Lena Horne, Harry Belafonte, Bing Crosby and Ray Charles during her 31 years at the hotel. She remembered how a party thrown by singer Don Ho left pineapple juice in the hallway. ``In those days, the music was so loud that it began to run you crazy,'' said Ms. Bell, 60, who'll now try to collect unemployment payments. ``Now I miss it. I have dropped tears when I see those singers on TV. They're getting so old and I wonder, `How about me?''' The hotel, which sits on 23.5 acres of expansive greenery on Wilshire Boulevard, faces an uncertain future, said spokeswoman Margaret Burk. Two companies are negotiating to buy it, she said. The Ambassador dramatically came into the national limelight when Sen. Robert Kennedy was assassinated there on June 6, 1968. He was shot to death as he made his way through the hotel's kitchen toward a news conference moments after declaring victory in California's Democratic presidential primary. But the hotel had been a landmark for years before, thanks in part to its famous Cocoanut Grove nightclub, where such stars as Sammy Davis Jr., Nat ``King'' Cole and Bob Hope performed. Khrushchev slept at the hotel and newspaper tycoon William Randolph Hearst entertained there. But despite its history, the Ambassador will not have a ceremony to mark its closing, Ms. Burk said. Management decided against a party because people have known for two years that the hotel would be closing. Duke Russell, 62, a bellhop at the hotel during the summer of his freshman year in high school, came back for a last, short visit with his wife. ``I have a good feeling about this place,'' said Russell, now retired. ``In 1941, this was a rather exciting, elegant, plush place.'' Another visitor, Betty Szeden, who first set foot in the Ambassador 30 years ago as a model in a fashion show, came back Monday with her husband to catch the bus to the Rose Parade. ``It was sad and quiet last night,'' she said. ``But I'm glad to see it again.'' 
Bartender Cy Hunt isn't suggesting that Walpole drown its latest sorrow in drink, but he's come up with a mud-colored concoction he says has residents talking about the town's selection as a landfill. It's called a Sludge Deluxe Frappe, and it's been on the menu at the Barleycorn Pub in the center of town since Dec. 21 when the state announced its selection of Walpole as a landfill for the millions of tons of sludge to come from the cleanup of Boston Harbor. The town, which is already home to the state's maximum security prison and neighbor to a minimum-security institution, hopes to reverse a final vote on the landfill question on Wednesday. ``People here don't want the sludge,'' said Hunt, who has tended bar at the Barleycorn for five years. ``This is a way to get them to talk more about it.'' The $3.75 drink is a mixture of a coffee and Irish liqueurs topped with shredded coconut and chocolate jimmies. ``Everybody gets a laugh out of it,'' said Hunt, ``but it also gets them talking about the problem.'' 
Communist authorities say they have legally registered a Polish-U.S. friendship organization in what appears the government's first official approval of such a group. At least two other organizations seeking to promote Polish-U.S. relations have attempted to gain legal status since 1987, but were denied permission. The Poland-USA Association, registered in the western city of Poznan, will be allowed to operate nationwide, the state-run PAP news agency said in a dispatch Monday. Its goal will be to familiarize Poles with current social, economic and political issues in the United States. A U.S. Embassy spokesman in Warsaw said the embassy was aware of the group. As part of planned political reforms, the government of Prime Minister Mieczyslaw F. Rakowski has been working on a draft law to make it easier for individuals to form private associations. Poland has friendship societies with at least 45 other countries, ranging from Iceland to Libya to Canada and the Soviet Union. A thaw in U.S.-Polish relations since early 1987 has led to the lifting of sanctions Washington imposed on the Warsaw government after it stifled the Solidarity free trade union movement in a December 1981 military crackdown. 
Dense fog and freezing drizzle covered the nation's eastern half today, and light snow fell over northern border states from Maine to North Dakota. Fog was so thick Monday on Lake Pontchartrain that Louisiana police closed the 26-mile causeway to New Orleans. Advisories for dense fog were in effect today for central Florida, southern Louisiana, Houston, San Antonio, Texas; Arkansas; and Bakersfield, Calif. Freezing drizzle made bridges and overpasses slick in the Topeka, Kan., area and glazed roads around Pocatello, Idaho. In six hours overnight, an inch of snow fell in International Falls, Minn.; Syracuse, N.Y.; Limestone, Maine; Hibbing, Minn.; and Rome, N.Y. Light rain fell from northern Mississippi to the Tennessee Valley and North Carolina and in the Pacific Northwest. Clear skies prevailed from the central and southern Rockies to much of California. Winds were gusty again along the east slopes of the Rockies. Fort Collins, Colo., recorded gusts of 60 to 70 mph Monday night. A low-pressure system over the northern Plains was partly responsible for Colorado's high winds, and was expected to spread snow over the Great Lakes area and north Atlantic Coast states as it heads east today and Wednesday. A snow advisory was in effect for much of Ohio today, and a winter storm watch was posted for tonight for northern New Jersey and the New York City area. Today's forecast called for snow from the Great Lakes to the upper Ohio Valley and New Jersey; rain from the middle Atlantic Coast states to the Carolinas, Georgia, Alabama and the lower Mississippi Valley, and in the Pacific Northwest, with some snow in eastern Washington state. High temperatures were forecast in the teens and 20s from the northern Plains to the upper Mississippi Valley, the Great Lakes and northern New England; 20s over sections of Nevada; 50s and 60s from the California coast to the southern Rockies, Oklahoma, the northern half of Texas, Arkansas, the Tennessee Valley and the southern Atlantic Coast; 70s from the southern half of Texas to the Gulf Coast and northern and central Florida; 80s in southern Florida and the southern tip of Texas; and 30s and 40s in the rest of the nation. Temperatures around the nation at 2 a.m. EST ranged from 2 degrees below zero at Sault Sainte Marie, Mich., to 73 degrees at McAllen and Brownsville, Texas. Other reports: _East: Atlanta 47 cloudy; Boston 36 cloudy; Buffalo 23 fair; Charleston, S.C. 51 partly cloudy; Cincinnati 32 foggy; Cleveland 14 fair; Detroit 20 cloudy; Miami 65 fair; New York 39 partly cloudy; Philadelphia 35 fair; Pittsburgh 25 partly cloudy; Portland, Maine 29 cloudy; Washington 33 fair. _Central: Bismarck 27 snow; Chicago 24 foggy; Dallas-Fort Worth 55 foggy; Denver 43 windy; Des Moines 28 partly cloudy; Indianapolis 28 cloudy; Kansas City 31 foggy; Minneapolis-St. Paul 16 cloudy; Nashville 43 foggy; New Orleans 68 foggy; St. Louis 34 foggy. _West: Albuquerque 34 cloudy; Anchorage 4 partly cloudy; Las Vegas 33 fair; Los Angeles 52 fair; Phoenix 51 partly cloudy; Salt Lake City 23 foggy; San Diego 51 fair; San Francisco 46 fair; Seattle 48 cloudy. _Canada: Montreal 18 fair; Toronto 21 partly cloudy. 
Farmers lamented the loss of scores of animals as emergency officials tallied the damage from the wall of water that swept down the Virgin River after a dike broke, flooding 50 homes and 100 apartments. ``We lost 114 pigs,'' Ron Cannon said Monday. ``We only found 33 alive. The rest have floated away.'' On Don Taylor's 40-acre farm, the New Year's Day flood in southwest Utah washed out roads, moved buildings and sheds off their foundations and left 27 cows, two calves, four horses, a goat and the family cat missing. Authorities evacuated 1,500 people before the 12-foot wall of water surged from the 200-foot-wide gap in the earthen dike at Quail Creek Reservoir early Sunday. No people were injured, but an undetermined number of livestock were killed and four bridges were washed out. By Monday, the flow from the broken dike had slowed to a trickle. Gov. Norm Bangerter has declared Washington County an emergency disaster area. Federal Emergency Management Agency representatives arrived Monday to begin determining whether the county will be declared a national disaster area. Such a declaration would make people eligible for federal reimbursement of up to 75 percent of their losses, said Washington County Emergency Management Director Tony Hafan. The rest would come from state and local governments. Officials estimate it will take at least six months to design and rebuild the 2,000-foot-long, 50-foot-high dike. The $3 million dike was part of a $23.5 million reservoir and dam project 14 miles east of St. George that was completed three years ago. In Washington five miles east of St. George, the bridge connecting the city with Washington Fields remains out, making a 15-mile detour to get from one city to the other necessary. A bridge on Utah 9 connecting Interstate 15 and Hurricane still stands, but is unusable because highway approaches on either side were undermined and washed downstream. ``About 750 people use that bridge each day to go to work and to go to school at Dixie College,'' said Hurricane City Manager Rick Marshel. 
A U.S. sailor approached a cage holding circus tigers and was attacked through the bars by one of the beasts, suffering a broken arm and cuts, police said today. Circus workers rescued Donald Jude McKaig when they heard his screams, said a police official, speaking on condition of anonymity. McKaig, 26, a sailor on the amphibious cargo ship St. Louis, climbed over a 6{-foot-high fence late Monday to approach the cage where six tigers were kept for a circus in Sasebo on Japan's southernmost main island of Kyushu. McKaig was taken to a hospital at the U.S. Naval Base in Sasebo, where the St. Louis is based, and later was transferred to a U.S. Naval hospital in Yokosuka, 27 miles southwest of Tokyo, the official said. Police said he suffered a broken arm and cuts. McKaig's hometown was not available immediately. 
Two governors began work today, an incumbent in Utah and a Republican in Montana who was the first GOP candidate to win that state's highest office in 20 years. In Salt Lake City, Republican Gov. Norm Bangerter, who barely survived a three-way gubernatorial election in November, began his second term as the state's 13th governor. Val Oveson, the incumbent lieutenant governor also was sworn in during Monday's ceremony. Stan Stephens, a former Montana state senator who moved to the state from Canada 40 years ago to harvest wheat, took his oath in Helena after Allen Kolstad, a farmer-businessman from Chester and also a former state senator, was sworn in as lieutenant governor. Bangerter, who trailed Democrat Ted Wilson by more than 30 percentage points in the polls this past summer, rallied to claim a 40-38 percent victory over Wilson. Independent Merrill Cook had 22 percent. Bangerter, 55, said he followed the advice of the late British Prime Minister Winston Churchill: ``Never give in, never give in, never, never give in, except to convictions of honor or good sense.'' Bangerter was sworn in before a crowd of 1,400 at the Capitol Rotunda. Stephens, 59, told the inaugural audience at the Capitol in Helena that he assumes the job of chief executive with a ``deep sense of responsibility'' knowing of the troubles that beset Montana. ``The Montana economy has been depressed,'' Stephens said. ``We have endured the ravages of drought and forest fires and of being perceived negatively on the barometric scales of business and commerce. ``Montana's spirit has been bruised, but never broken,'' he said. Stephens, who portrayed himself as a harbinger of change during his two-year campaign, pledged that change will be for the better. 
The U.S. dollar was lower in modest European trading today, pressured by sporadic selling in Asian and European markets. Gold prices rose on the dollar's weakness. ``We see commercial interests selling dollars that are coming out of the Far East,'' said a dealer at a major West German bank in Frankfurt. Frankfurt and Milan dealers said trading volume was likely to stay moderate until the New York market opens. ``There's no real hard news to trade on,'' said one trader in Milan. In Tokyo, markets were closed for an extended New Year holiday. In Europe, the dollar was quoted at 123.80 yen, down from 125.10 yen in Tokyo last Friday. The British pound jumped nearly two cents against the dollar, apparently boosted by government assurances that it will keep raising interest rates if necessary to combat inflation. Other dollar rates at midmorning, compared with late Friday: _ 1.7615 West German marks, down from 1.7725 _ 1.4925 Swiss francs, down from 1.5025 _ 6.0185 French francs, down from 6.0600 _ 1.98875 Dutch guilders, down from 2.0020 _ 1,299.50 Italian lire, down from 1,305.25 _ 1.1895 Canadian dollars, down from 1.1927 In London, the British pound rose to $1.826, from $1.8062 late Friday. Gold opened in London at a bid price of $412.30 a troy ounce, up from $410.05 bid late Friday. In Zurich, the bid price was $413.30, up from $411 dollars bid late Friday. Earlier, in Hong Kong, gold rose 70 cents to close at a bid $414.11, compared with Saturday's $413.41. Silver was quoted in London today at a bid price of $6.07 a troy ounce, up from Friday's $6.04. 
Police shot, wounded and captured a man sought in a double slaying and the abduction of a couple, but another suspect escaped, authorities said. Edward Furnace, 23, was arrested Monday at an apartment in Van Nuys about 15 miles northwest of downtown Los Angeles, police Lt. William Hall said. Officers staking out the apartment fired when Furnace let himself inside while carrying a semiautomatic rifle and refused to drop the weapon, Hall said. He was booked for investigation of murder at the jail ward of County-USC Medical Center after treatment at another hospital for a gunshot wound to the thigh, Hall said. Police aided by a tracking dogs searched nearby buildings for the other suspect, but were unable to find him, Officer Bill Frio said. On Sunday night, the two men fired shots at four other men at an apartment building in Van Nuys, police said. One of the victims, who appeared to be in his mid-20s, died at the scene, and his 28-year-old companion died at a hospital a short time later, Officer George Moreno said. Their identities were withheld until relatives could be notified, Hall said. Timothy Brown, 24, was in stable condition at Northridge Community Hospital with a gunshot wound to the back, Hall said. An 18-year-old man who was with the three wounded men escaped gunfire by ducking under a car, then running away. ``The investigation revealed that the same two suspects, just prior to the shooting incident, had come to the apartment building and accosted two other victims at gunpoint,'' Moreno said. The armed men took the man and woman to a vacant apartment, then left the couple unharmed. 
In more than one unfriendly ballpark, Dodger manager Tommy Lasorda has probably been called chopped liver. But fried mozzarella? Or escarole and beans? Or littleneck clams in a garlic pesto sauce over linguine? (Try shouting that last one with a mouthful of peanuts). Lasorda has been called all of these and more, not from the stands, but on the menus of various Southern California eateries that have honored him and other celebrities by naming foods after them. While restaurateurs find the rotund manager of Los Angeles' World Series champion baseball team one of their favorite people to name a food after, a number of other notables have also been bestowed such honors. For example: _The Ronald Reagan is a baked ham and Swiss cheese triple-decker sandwich at the Legends of Hollywood delicatessen; a liverwurst and bologna triple-decker at the Stage; and a roast beef, ham and American cheese hero at the Substation. _The Arnold Schwarzenegger is a triple-decked turkey, liver and salami sandwich at Legends of Hollywood; a No. 518 Muscle Sandwich with avocados, vegetables, cheese and mushrooms on whole wheat at Larry Parker's Beverley Hills 24-Hour Diner; and an omelet filled with Swiss cheese and chopped tomatoes at the Ocean Park Omelette Parlor in Santa Monica. Having a meal named after them doesn't seem to be too hard to swallow for some celebrities. Just ask Dick Clark, who's a sandwich piled high with turkey at the Stage. ``Turkey is good for you, what can I say,'' Clark said. ``I'm honored to be in the presence of the Tommy Lasorda chopped liver, but I'm a little disappointed they gave the peanut butter and jelly to David Letterman.'' 
Six weeks before the promised Soviet withdrawal of all troops from Afghanistan, members of the Kabul government have moved dependents to new homes near the Soviet border, Western diplomats said today. The diplomats also said the country's ruling Peoples Democratic Party is changing its name and that of its newspaper in an effort to broaden its appeal and remove references to the bloody 1978 revolution it rode to power. The moves coincide with the exodus of Soviet civilian advisers from the Afghan capital and warnings from foreign embassies that their nationals leave the country unless they have essential business, the diplomats said. Under U.N.-mediated accords, half of the roughly 100,000 Soviet troops that had been in Afghanistan fighting Moslem guerrillas left the country by Aug. 15 and the balance are to be out by Feb. 15. Soviet troops intervened in Afghanistan to prop up the government in 1979. In the western part of the country, the Soviet pullout has begun from Shindad and Herat, said the Islamabad-based diplomats, who spoke on condition of anonymity. They quoted Afghan officials as saying the the main military withdrawal will begin Jan. 15. The diplomats said senior members of the Peoples Democratic Party of Afghanistan have been allocated apartments in Mazar-e-Sharief, 165 miles northeast of Kabul. Most of them have sent their dependents and household goods to town near the Soviet border. The Special Guard, which protects party and government officials, has increased to at least 4,000 members and is expected to rise to 20,000 to withstand guerrilla attacks when the Soviets leave, the diplomats said. Special Aeroflot flights have taken Soviet advisers from the capital, and the Soviet Embassy has been reduced to about 100 workers, the diplomats said. The ruling party will change its name to the Liberal, Democratic and National Party and adopt ``free market policies along the lines of Western Social Democratic parties,'' said one Western diplomat, citing Afghan sources. The name of the party newspaper has been changed from Truth of the April Revolution to the more moderate Message, diplomats said. ``The symbolism of junking the name of the (April 1978) revolution ... is probably only the first in a series of steps designated to paper over the image of the (party) as a revolutionary communist party,'' another diplomat said. A cease-fire President Najib offered on New Year's Day has been ignored by guerrillas and by government troops. State-run radio said 82 people _ including 79 guerrillas _ were killed and 40 wounded in fighting Sunday and Monday. It said the three others were civilians. There was no independent confirmation. Western diplomats reported that 132 people were killed in heavy bombing by the Soviet and Afghan air force just north of Kabul on Dec. 26 and Dec. 27. The diplomats estimated that 100 guerrillas, 20 civilians, and 12 government troops were killed in the bombing. Anti-communist guerrillas also have renewed attacks on other government-held cities. Tass today reported that security forces uncovered a guerrilla storehouse in the capital with 84 rockets, grenades and more than 300 rifles. 
An 88-year-old retired fruit picker who authorities said had trouble getting along with others is accused of using his walking cane to beat two fellow retirement home residents to death. Henry Thomas was arrested Sunday night, his cane and clothes splattered with blood. One of Thomas' roommates, Max Nickbarge, 90, was slain early Sunday. Also killed was 73-year-old Myrtle Smith. Four others suffered injuries ranging from a fractured skull to broken bones and cuts. Nine people lived at Reflections I, a small wood-frame house about 30 miles northeast of Tampa, and Thomas shared a 10-by-9-foot room with two others. Thomas did not get along with the other residents, said Dade City Police Chief Phil Thompson. ``There was some bitterness in the home between our suspect, Mr. Thomas, and the other residents of the home,'' Thompson said. ``Evidently, that bitterness ... had been building. Evidently, in the early-morning hours of New Year's Day, this thing came to a head and Mr. Thomas took his action.'' The owner of the home, Helen Tear, said Thomas would get angry at Nickbarge for picking things up and moving them around in the house. She said he also got angry when his roommates squabbled. The bodies were discovered by staff members. ``We feel the murder weapon involved is the cane of Mr. Thomas,'' Thompson said. ``It is a heavy, oak-type cane.'' Thomas was being held without bond in the Pasco County Detention Center Monday. He is charged with two counts of first-degree murder, and charges were being prepared in the injuries to the four other residents, Thompson said. 
Police today handcuffed and arrested Trevor Tutu, son of Nobel Prize winner Desmond Tutu, for failing to appear in court for traffic violations. The arrest came minutes after the 32-year-old son of the black Anglican church leader faced a court on another charge. Tutu shouted at police during his arrest and urged his immediate release. ``I have already been threatened with death,'' he told reporters. The arrest came after he appeared in Kempton Park Magistrate's Court because of remarks he allegedly made to police Dec. 31 when they told him not to leave his luggage unattended at an airport. Police have not said what remarks he may have made, and the court case was postponed until Feb. 15. As Tutu left the courthouse, police handcuffed and arrested him on charges of failing to appear in court for three traffic violations. He was then taken to Johannesburg Magistrate's Court. While he was being arrested, Tutu called one superintendent a ``stupid hooligan.'' He was questioned at the second courthouse and taken to police headquarters for investigation of other possible charges. He told reporters he intended bringing an urgent court action for his release and protection from possible police violence. Trevor Tutu is the eldest of four children of Archbishop Tutu, leader of the Anglican Church in southern Africa and winner of the 1984 Nobel Peace Prize for his anti-apartheid campaigning. In 1984, Trevor Tutu was held by police for three days before he being cleared of a charge of drunken driving. In 1985, he was briefly detained after arguing with police at a courthouse about the detention of black children. The Dec. 31 incident began when police told him not to leave his luggage unattended at Jan Smuts Airport. Police have warned South Africans not to leave parcels and luggage unattended in public places because of a bombing campaign by anti-government guerrillas, which has killed 35 people and injured more than 660 in the past 2{ years. 
Peter Bogdanovich has married the younger sister of Dorothy Stratten, a murdered Playboy playmate with whom Bogdanovich was once romantically linked, the movie director's lawyer said. Bogdanovich, 49, whose films include ``The Last Picture Show,'' ``Paper Moon,'' and ``Mask,'' married Louise Hoogstratten, 20, also known as L.B. Stratten, near Vancouver, Canada, on Friday, said attorney Joel R. Junker of Seattle. Dorothy Stratten, the 1980 Playmate of the Year who acted in one of Bogdanovich's films, was shot to death by her estranged husband, Paul Snider, in August 1980 in California. The killing reportedly occurred after Snider learned his wife was having an affair with Bogdanovich. Snider committed suicide after killing Stratten. Nelly Hoogstratten, Louise's mother, told Canadian Broadcasting Corp. Television that she was not informed about the wedding. ``I've cried before, and I cry now because I've lost another daughter,'' she said when interviewed on the doorstep of her home in Vancouver. In his book ``The Killing of the Unicorn: Dorothy Stratten, 1960-1980,'' Bogdanovich said Hugh Hefner's Playboy empire played a role in her death. He also claimed Hefner demeaned Stratten. Bogdanovich wrote of how he was captivated by Dorothy Stratten, whom he directed in the movie ``They All Laughed,'' a comedy with John Ritter, Audrey Hepburn and Ben Gazzara, and quoted her as expressing distaste for the lifestyle of at the Playboy mansion. He once called her ``the noblest person I ever met.'' She was the subject of the 1983 movie ``Star 80,'' and the 1981 television movie ``Death of a Centerfold.'' In the mid-1980s, stories surfaced referring to a relationship between Bogdanovich and Stratten's younger sister. The younger Stratten later filed a slander lawsuit against Hefner and Burl Eldridge, who was married to her mother from May 1980 to January 1981. The lawsuit contended Hefner and Eldridge falsely told reporters Bogdanovich had seduced Louise Stratten when she was 13 and had sex with her mother after Stratten was killed. The lawsuit also contended Hefner and Eldridge falsely claimed Bogdanovich had paid for Louise Stratten to have plastic surgery to make her look more like her late sister. She dropped the lawsuit in August 1985 and Bogdanovich said at the time he hoped that resolution would end his feud with Hefner. 
A nephew of the late President Gamal Abdel Nasser today returned home to stand trial for complicity in terrorist attacks on Israeli and U.S. diplomats. He was arrested upon his arrival. Police apprehended Dr. Gamal Shawky Abdel Nasser at Cairo International Airport after he stepped off a flight from London, the government's Middle East News Agency reported. He was dressed in winter clothes when officers brought him into the courtroom for today's resumption of the trial, which involves 20 defendants. The 20 are alleged to belong to a group called Egypt's Revolution. Among them is President Nasser's eldest son, Khaled, who remains a fugitive. Prosecutors allege Egypt's Revolution launched attacks from 1984 to 1987 in which two Israeli diplomats were killed and six wounded. Two U.S. diplomats suffered minor injuries. Khaled Nasser and 10 co-defendants are charged with murder, undermining Egypt's security and damaging relations with the United States and Israel. The indictment demands the death penalty for them. The remaining nine defendants, including Gamal Nasser, are charged with complicity in the attacks. The indictment requests prison terms of up to 25 years for them. All the defendants are in custody excetp Khaled Nasser, who was in Yugoslavia when the indictment was returned and has refused to come to Egypt for the trial, which began in November. Egypt's Revolution claimed responsibility for the attacks in statements that opposed Egypt's 1979 peace treaty with Israel, criticized the United States and professed the pan-Arab philosophy nurtured by the late president. 
Volunteers labored to save 1,400 sea birds contaminated by one of the worst oil spills in the Pacific Northwest as other workers collected more than 2,000 dead waterfowl to prevent eagles and other predators from poisoning themselves. Meanwhile, cleanup crews planned to return by helicopter today to clean remote wilderness beaches of oil globs from a barge that collided with the tugboat towing it Dec. 22, spilling as much as 231,000 gallons of fuel oil off Grays Harbor. Oil from the spill has been found along almost 300 miles of Pacific beaches, reaching as far north as Canada's Vancouver Island and as far south as Newport, Ore. More than 4,800 sea birds have been contaminated, and more than half of them have died, said Ron Holcomb of the state Department of Ecology. A cleanup center in Ocean Shores has received about 2,500 birds, of which 540 died, Holcomb said. Cleanup work also continued on a smaller scale at a second center in Astoria, Ore. Holcomb said 15 cleaned birds were released Monday along Hood Canal, a saltwater inlet 60 miles inland. Other volunteers have collected more than 2,000 dead birds to prevent eagles and other predators from eating them. Washington has the largest wintering eagle population in the 48 contiguous states. The beach cleanup crews worked Monday in areas 70 miles to 90 miles north of Grays Habor. Cleanup operations on remote wilderness and Indian reservation beaches required the use of helicopters, said Olympic National Park's chief ranger, Chuck Janda. ``It's probably safe to state there's hardly an area of the park's 60 miles of coastline that hasn't been impacted in some way by oil, as either evidenced by birds coming ashore or the globules of oil,'' Janda said. 
The body of a woman missing for more than three years was discovered by a daughter in a locked freezer in the family home near here, police said. A suspect was arrested and was expected to be charged today in the death of Dorothy Tyburski, 37, who was reported missing in October 1985, said police Sgt. Erne Sayre. The suspect's name was not released. Tyburski's clothed, frozen body was found Monday by a daughter, Kelly, 20, who pried the lock off the freezer in the basement of her mother's home, Sayre said. The cause of Tyburski's death was undetermined, Sayre said. An autopsy will be performed. Investigators searched for Tyburski for about two years, but dropped the case because of a lack of leads, Sayre said. Tyburski lived with her husband, Leonard, who is dean of students at Mackenzie High School in Detroit, and the couple's two daughters before she vanished, police said. Plymouth is about 25 miles west of Detroit. 
Sweden and Poland have reached agreement on the border dividing their territorial waters in the Baltic, the Foreign Ministry said today. The agreement, which followed 10 years of negotiations, will be signed shortly when Foreign Minister Sten Andersson visits Warsaw, the Svenska Dagbladet daily said. Sweden will get 75 percent of the 200-square-mile area, which was under negotiation for 10 years, the ministry said in a statement. The area is southeast of the Swedish island of Gotland. In January 1988, Sweden and the Soviet Union resolved a similar dispute over 5,400 square miles. ``It's extremely satisfying that we have been able to reach an agreement with yet another country concerning the division of the Baltic,'' Andersson said in a statement. ``The agreement means that we have clarified the fishing rights and the exploitation of other riches from a very important part of the Baltic,'' he said. Sweden and Finland still are disputing Baltic territorial waters. 
The government of President Saddam Hussein plans to relax restrictions on foreigners wishing to visit Iraq, an official publication reported today. The weekly magazine Al-Ittihad said Hussein signed a decree Dec. 26 loosening requirements to enter the country. It magazine, which is published by the Federation of the Chamber of Commerce, did not give specifics. An official source, who requested anonymity, said that once the decree takes effect, most Arab nationals and many other foreigners will be allowed to enter Iraq without visas. He did not elaborate. Any foreigner who wishes to travel to Iraq now needs a visa, for which an application must be sent to Baghdad, cleared by the Foreign Ministry and approved by an embassy. The decree will become effective only after it is officially published, and the source said he did not know when that will occur. The move will not affect Iraqis, who will need government permission to leave the country. Hussein embarked on a liberalization campaign after the U.N.-sponsored cease-fire in the 8-year Iran-Iraq war took effect Aug. 20. He announced in November that the formation of additional political parties will be allowed after 20 years of single-party rule by his Baath Arab Socialist Party. 
A NASA research plane took off for the Arctic today on the first flight of a six-week search for signs that the Earth is losing its protective ozone layer over the region. The high-altitude ER-2 airplane departed from Sola Air Base at the west coast city of Stavanger, where the project is based, to analyze the atmospheric layer 12 miles above the planet's surface. Many of the 150 Americans and Europeans in the $10 million project are veterans of a 1987 expedition that documented an ``ozone hole'' over Antarctica. For several years, experts have warned that man-made chemicals, especially chlorofluorocarbons used in refrigerators, aerosol cans, cleaning processes and in making plastic foam, were destroying the ozone layer. Ozone protects the Earth from the sun's harmful ultraviolet rays, and studies have shown that a decline in the ozone can lead to increases in skin cancer and eye damage. Scientists at Sola say the Arctic hole appears to be smaller than the one over Antarctica, but could be more dangerous because it is closer to where more people live. Last March, an international group reported evidence that ozone also is being lost in other places, especially in northern latitudes where Europe and North America have high populations. ``The idea here is to look at what happens not only in the vortex, but what consequences it could have for the ozone at lower latitudes,'' Ivar Isaksen, a University of Oslo professor, said before the project began. The vortex is a swirl of westerly winds over the Arctic. The project, sponsored by the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration, is also aimed at exploring stratospheric clouds that form near the vortex and find out what role they play in ozone loss. The ER-2, a modern version of the U-2 spy plane, will be supplemented by a modified DC-8 flying at lower altitudes. The planes, carrying a variety of measuring instruments, will fly 10 to 12 missions in the area between northern Norway, Greenland and the North Pole. Weather balloons will also be sent up, and scientists working in a hangar at the Norwegian air base will compile and analyze the data through a computer network. The scientists may release preliminary findings when the project ends in mid-February, but complete results will not be available until after several months of study and discussion, said Dr. Adrian Tuck, a project chemist and meteorologist. 
An increase in single-family home building and government projects pushed construction spending up by 0.8 percent in November, the third consecutive monthly gain, the government said today. Building activity rose to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of $411.1 billion in November, following a 0.2 percent rise in October and a 0.9 percent jump in September. Even with the gains, construction activity as a whole was up only a lackluster 1 percent for the first 11 months of 1988, compared with the same period of 1987. The figures are not adjusted for inflation. Rising interest rates have dampened activity in most sectors. Fixed-rate home mortgages averaged 10.77 percent during the last week of 1988, the highest in 13{ months. Apartment and office building construction in particular have been sluggish, held back by high vacancy rates in many parts of the country, especially the Southwest. In November, residential construction rose 0.7 percent to a seasonally adjusted $200.4 billion, reflecting a 2.3 percent gain in single-family home building. Apartment construction dropped 1.9 percent. Non-residential construction dropped 0.8 percent in October, falling to an annual rate of $92.3 billion. Declines in office building and in commercial projects such as shopping centers more than wiped out gains in hotel and motel construction and in industrial buildings. Hotel and motel building was up 6.6 percent and factory construction rose 1.3 percent. The industrial sector has been one of the strongest this year as manufacturers expand capacity to meet demand generated by a boom in export sales. Office construction posted a 2.5 percent decline in November, while commercial projects dropped 2.2 percent. Government construction climbed 4 percent to an annual rate of $81 billion, reflecting increased spending for schools, sewer systems and roads. Highway construction, the largest government category, rose 2.7 percent in November to an annual rate of $26.6 billion. 
A Swedish appeals court today rejected a request for immediate release by a suspect accused of killing Prime Minister Olof Palme. A court clerk said the three-judge panel ruled unanimously that Christer Pettersson, 41, will remain in custody until Jan. 13, when prosecutors must formally charge him, seek a second extension or release him. Palme, Sweden's four-term prime minister, was shot on the night of Feb. 28, 1986, walking home from a movie in Stockholm. Pettersson, who has a history of violent and petty crimes and psychiatric treatment, was arrested Dec. 14 after the largest manhunt in Sweden's history. Newspapers and the two national television networks have reported that he was identified by as many as three witnesses as being at the scene of the shooting. Prosecutors have released virtually no information about their case, and neither Pettersson's name nor picture has been published in Sweden in keeping with Swedish press regulations. 
Bomb threats forced unscheduled landings at airports in Switzerland and Italy and delayed two departures from Geneva, authorities said today. The Scandinavian airline SAS, prompted by a bomb threat reportedly from an Iranian Shiite Moslem group, maintained the highest alert in its history, causing flight delays for a third day. Airlines have been especially sensitive to threats since a bomb exploded aboard a Pan Am jumbo jet on Dec. 21, killing 270 people on board and in the Scottish village of Lockerbie. ``In most cases, such calls prove to be a hoax,'' said Peter Gutknecht, spokesman at Kloten airport. ``But we have to take every threat seriously.'' An Alitalia DC-9 was on a flight from Paris to Venice when the pilot was told by Munich air controllers of an anonymous bomb threat and decided to land at Kloten airport in Zurich, Switzerland. The flight continued early today after a search. A Tunis Air Boeing 737, on a flight from Geneva to Tunis, took off today morning following a 10-hour stopover at Milan's Malpensa airport during which Italian bomb disposal experts determined no explosives were aboard. Another anonymous threat forced about 30 passengers of an Istanbul-bound Pan Am Boeing 727 to spend the night at Geneva hotels. Their flight continued this morning after the plane was searched. The departure of a 727 of the British charter airline Dan Air with about 170 British children returning from a Swiss holiday was delayed by several hours Monday after Geneva police received a telephone call from a man who said security forces had 15 minutes to evacuate the plane. Police said the caller identified himself as a member of the Irish Republican Army, which is fighting to end British rule of Northern Ireland. The plane was searched, but no bomb was found. Passengers flying Scandinavian Airlines System from some 90 airports worldwide were asked to identify their luggage before it was loaded onto planes, and cargo was undergoing extra scrutiny, SAS officials said. Domestic fliers in Sweden took their own baggage to the aircraft, and unattended bags were hustled into secure areas and x-rayed. SAS spokesman Knut Lovstuhagen said delays were ``minimal _ up to 30 minutes.'' The heightened security measures began Sunday after a telephone caller told police in Budapest on New Year's Eve that SAS would be the target of a bomb attempt. In Manila, Philippine Airlines today released the names of four people that officials say may be members of a Palestinian faction planning to hijack or blow up an Asian airliner this month. Airline spokesman Rollie Estabillio said the four are believed to be members of a Palestine Liberation Organization faction led by Abu Musa, who is supported by Syria and Libya. Estabillio said the names were provided by Japanese authorities. 
Torture murderer Gary Heidnik, on death row since July, took an overdose of anti-psychotic medicine and is hospitalized in critical condition, his psychiatrist said. ``He may not survive,'' said Dr. Clancy D. McKenzie. ``He's on a respirator. If he does survive this, he could have severe liver damage or brain damage, and he could die of the side effects.'' Heidnik, 45, a self-proclaimed minister, was convicted of murdering two of six women he abducted and kept shackled in a basement torture chamber in his Philadelphia home. Lt. William Balzer, spokesman at the State Correctional Institution at Pittsburgh, said a guard found Heidnik unconscious in his cell about 3 a.m. Sunday. Heidnik remained in critical but stable condition today at West Penn Hospital, prison spokesman Tom Seiverling said. He declined to elaborate. A hospital spokeswoman referred all calls to the penitentiary. Though prison officials would give few details, McKenzie said Monday that doctors at West Penn told him Heidnik took an overdose of Thorazine, which he probably had been stockpiling for three months. Heidnik was convicted of first-degree murder, kidnapping, rape, aggravated assault and involuntary deviate sexual intercourse. Arguments were scheduled for Feb. 9 on post-trial motions and sentencing of Heidnik on 16 other charges. McKenzie, who contended prison officials refused to allow him to treat Heidnik, also questioned the medical care the inmate received in prison before the suicide attempt. ``With a history of more than 15 suicide attempts, many of them with Thorazine, I would have been very careful to make sure he wasn't stockpiling them,'' McKenzie said. 
Sir Geoffrey Howe, the British foreign secretary, urged Israel to give a ``matching response'' to Yasser Arafat's peace overtures and said British officials hoped to meet PLO leaders next week. Howe, who today wound up a two-day visit to Kuwait, also said he would ask Arab states to help locate the terrorists responsible for the Dec. 21 bombing of a Pan Am jumbo jet over Scotland that killed 270 people. The British foreign secretary spoke to reporters after meeting with the Emir of Kuwait and Kuwait's foreign minister. Howe said William Waldegrave, Britain's deputy foreign secretary, will visit Tunis next week and ``hopefully he will have the opportunity to meet with PLO leaders.'' Last month, Waldegrave met in London with Bassam Abu Sharif, PLO chairman Yasser Arafat's media adviser, for the first high-level contact between Britain and the Palestine Liberation Organization. The United States last month lifted a 13-year ban on the PLO and agreed to initiate a dialogue with Arafat after he explicitly recognized Israel and renounced terrorism. ``We have welcomed the recent statements by the Palestine leadership ... We must all now look to the new government of Israel to make a matching response,'' Howe said. ``We will certainly go on urging that message on the prime minister of Israel, Mr. (Yitzhak) Shamir.'' He said the message was based on ``the right of Israel to a secure existence and the right of the Palestinian people to self determination.'' Howe said his talks with the Kuwaiti leaders covered ``a lot of bilateral and regional issues. ``We have, of course, discussed our cooperation on security matters,'' he said. ``I know that our friends in the gulf will do all they can to help us identify those responsible (for the Pan Am bombing), for there must be no safe haven for people responsible for such wicked actions,'' Howe said. Commenting on U.S. allegations that Western nations helped build a chemical weapons plant in Libya, Howe dismissed as ``speculation'' reports the United States was preparing military action against the alleged plant. ``As far as the report of chemical warfare capabilities in Libya is concerned, we find any report of that kind very disturbing,'' he added. Howe is on a six-nation tour that will also take him to Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, North Yemen and Djibouti. 
The home of country music is singing the blues after the sale of its last locally owned music publising company to CBS Records. Tree International Publishing, ranked as Billboard magazine's No. 1 country music publisher for the last 16 years, is being sold to New York-based CBS for a reported $45 million to $50 million, The Tennessean reported today. The company, whose catalog of music copyrights includes more than 35,000 songs by such artists as Willie Nelson, Buck Owens, Merle Haggard, Harlan Howard and Roger Miller, was the last major publishing property in the city that had not been acquired by an out-of-town conglomerate. `I'm saddened by the whole thing,'' said Roger Sovine, the Nashville head of Broadcast Music Inc. and a former Tree executive. ``It's the end of an era.'' But company officials defended the sale as being good for the city. ``Nashville will be the headquarters for all CBS publishing,'' said Tree International owner Buddy Killen. ``This is great for Nashville. ``We're going to quadruple the size of Tree very quickly.'' Killen, 52, said he will be president of CBS-Tree Publishing. Tree vice president Donna Hilley will be chief operating officer. Country Music Foundation executive director Bill Ivey said the sale was sad, ``but it's also a final step in a trend that has been going on for decades.'' In the 1980s, such companies as Acuff-Rose, Cedarwood, House of Gold and Combine Music also went to out-of-town conglomerates. ``This is the loss of what has historically been Nashville's area of financial control. We're substituting control in New York or Los Angeles. And it's not a fair trade in any sense,'' Ivey said. He described the new character of Music Row as ``colonial operations in every segment of the industry.'' CBS Records President Tommy Mottola called the sale ``a marriage of two highly compatible partners.'' ``It's fitting that country music's leading publisher be united under the same roof with the leading record company in the world,'' he said. But Sovine said it will not be the same. ``The big conglomerates can't work with songwriters in the same way that Buddy did with Tree. He created a place for people to make music. He was the best and I hate to see it go away.'' 
Princess Diana, her two sons, mother and two sisters flew to Antigua today for a weeklong vacation in the Caribbean. Police and bodyguards kept photographers from taking pictures of Diana, Prince William, 6, and Prince Harry, 4, as they boarded a British Airways flight at Heathrow Airport. The princess and her children were traveling with her mother, Frances Shand-Kydd, and sisters, Lady Sarah McCorquodale and Lady Jane Fellowes. A spokesman at the Antigua and Barbuda High Commission in London, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the princess and her family were headed for the island of Tortola in the British Virgin Islands. Buckingham Palace said it could not confirm the report. ``This is a private holiday treat which Mrs. Shand-Kydd has planned for quite some time,'' said a Buckingham Palace spokesman, who by custom was not identified. During Diana's last holiday in the Caribbean, on the island of Eleuthera, photographers snapped pictures of the princess as she sunbathed in a bikini while pregnant with Prince William. Diana's husband, Prince Charles, remained at the estate of his mother, Queen Elizabeth II, in Sandringham, where the royal family celebrated the holidays. 
Foreign Minister Moshe Arens complained today that European countries are not consulting Israel about Middle East peace steps and said Israel is ready to suffer isolation from the world for the sake of security. In the the new foreign minister's first news conference with foreign correspondents, Arens said Israel does not approve of the European Community's plan announced Monday to start a Middle East peace initiative by encouraging an international conference on the region. ``I think it would be better if prior to undertaking any kind of intitiative, the members of the European Community were to meet with us, were to consult with us, were to coordinate with us,'' he said. Arens, 63, a former ambassador to the United States, also renewed Israel's criticism that the U.S. decision to hold talks with the Palestine Liberation Organization was damaging the fight against international terrorism. Arens became foreign minister with the formation of Israel's new government on Dec. 22. He is a member of the Likud bloc of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, which has opposed an international Middle East peace conference. Arens said his government does not welcome isolation but must think first of security. ``We should not be expected to take any step that might decrease the sense of isolation ... if they are steps that would endanger the state of Israel,'' Arens told the Foreign Press Association. Meanwhile, Lova Eliav, a member of the center-left Labor Party, said today he and three other Israeli parliament members will attend a European symposium this month on Middle East peace alongside PLO representatives despite Israel's ban on meetings with PLO members. ``We have to speak to the Palestinians directly and reach peace with them through compromise,'' Eliav said. ``The more we speak the better.'' The conference, titled ``A European Initiative For Peace in the Middle East,'' was initiated by several members of the European Parliament. It will be held in Paris on Jan. 12-13. Eliav said the other Israeli lawmakers planning to attend are Ora Namir, also of the Labor Party, Yair Tsaban, leader of the socialist Mapam Party, and Shulamit Aloni, head of the Citizens Rights Movement. The PLO is banned in Israel as a terrorist organization. The Citizens Rights Movement and Mapam have called on the government to revoke its ban, and public opinion polls indicate the majority of Israelis support a policy change on this issue. Last month the United States launched a dialogue with the PLO after Chairman Yasser Arafat recognized Israel and renounced terrorism. 
Children who lost five schoolmates in a New Year's Day house fire returned to class today after their teachers were briefed on how to help them cope with their loss. Classes at the 147-pupil Remer Elementary School started later than usual to give teachers time to meet with psychologists, counselors and clergy members, said Principal Mike Doro. The briefing was intended to help teachers cope with the tragedy that struck this north-central Minnesota town of 400 residents and to teach them how to help the children, Doro said. ``Being a small elementary school, it's like one big family,'' Doro said Monday. Eight children, five of them pupils at Remer Elementary, and two adults were killed early Sunday when the house caught fire as they slept. Investigators said Monday the cause of the blaze may never be known. ``The extent of the fire makes it very difficult,'' Deputy State Fire Marshal Elmer Baltes said as he surveyed the smoldering ruins of the home. Possible causes include a wood-burning stove, electrical problems, smoking, a Christmas tree and children playing with matches, Baltes said. Arson has been ruled out, and an oil-fueled space heater appeared to have been turned off and apparently did not cause the fire, Baltes said. The dead were identified as John and Nancy Watson's four children _ Jenny, 14, Samantha, 11, Edward, 9, and William, 8; Mrs. Watson's brother-in-law and sister, Jean and Becky Smischney; their two children _ Jay, 10, and Kimberly, 8 _ and the children of neighbors _ Robin Bastle, 12, and her sister, Michelle, 10. The Smischneys were visiting from Bemidji. ``I feel so sorry for the Watsons,'' the Bastles' mother, Nancy, said Monday. ``I have a daughter left; they don't have any children.'' Nancy Watson and her husband had been celebrating her 32nd birthday when the fire broke out early Sunday. When she returned to find her home in ashes, she became hysterical and tried to run into the house. She remained hospitalized for observation today. Friends and neighbors set up a memorial fund at a bank and jars in a cafe to accept donations. ``In a crisis like this, there will be a lot of people who will help in any way they can,'' said Doris Berczyk, 61, who was collecting donations at a cafe she owns. The Rev. H.N. Williams of the Remer Alliance Church said churches were considering a joint memorial service at the school. ``In a small town you're touched by everybody,'' resident Valerie Pound said. ``Everybody will pull together and help any way you can. Even though it's not going to bring the kids back, the families will know that everyone in this town is hurt by what happened and is behind them.'' 
The home of country music is singing the blues after the sale of its last locally owned music publising company to CBS Records. Tree International Publishing, ranked as Billboard magazine's No. 1 country music publisher for the last 16 years, is being sold to New York-based CBS for a reported $45 million to $50 million, The Tennessean reported today. The company, whose catalog of music copyrights includes more than 35,000 songs by such artists as Willie Nelson, Buck Owens, Merle Haggard, Harlan Howard and Roger Miller, was the last major publishing property in the city that had not been acquired by an out-of-town conglomerate. `I'm saddened by the whole thing,'' said Roger Sovine, the Nashville head of Broadcast Music Inc. and a former Tree executive. ``It's the end of an era.'' But company officials defended the sale as being good for the city. ``Nashville will be the headquarters for all CBS publishing,'' said Tree International owner Buddy Killen. ``This is great for Nashville. ``We're going to quadruple the size of Tree very quickly.'' Killen, 52, said he will be president of CBS-Tree Publishing. Tree vice president Donna Hilley will be chief operating officer. Country Music Foundation executive director Bill Ivey said the sale was sad, ``but it's also a final step in a trend that has been going on for decades.'' In the 1980s, such companies as Acuff-Rose, Cedarwood, House of Gold and Combine Music also went to out-of-town conglomerates. ``This is the loss of what has historically been Nashville's area of financial control. We're substituting control in New York or Los Angeles. And it's not a fair trade in any sense,'' Ivey said. He described the new character of Music Row as ``colonial operations in every segment of the industry.'' CBS Records President Tommy Mottola called the sale ``a marriage of two highly compatible partners.'' ``It's fitting that country music's leading publisher be united under the same roof with the leading record company in the world,'' he said. But Sovine said it will not be the same. ``The big conglomerates can't work with songwriters in the same way that Buddy did with Tree. He created a place for people to make music. He was the best and I hate to see it go away.'' 
Six clergymen went under bridge overpasses and through city parks to meet the homeless in an overnight visit that served as a spiritual kickoff to a $1.2 million fund-raising drive. The 12-hour look at life on the streets for the city's estimated 20,000 to 25,000 homeless people was enlightening, participants said. ``Our tradition addresses the widowed, the homeless and the downtrodden,'' said Rabbi Shaul Osadchey of Congregation Brith Shalom in Bellaire, who unsuccessfully tried to sleep on a park bench. ``I was surprised by the scope of the problem. I wasn't used to the homeless who are mentally ill.'' The clergy members, accompanied by United Way president Betty Beene and Jewish Community Center President Bubba Silberstein, are leaders in the 1989 Houston Campaign for the Homeless. The campaign officially starts Wednesday, but the Sunday night venture began a spiritual effort for many participants. ``God led us to last night's experience,'' said Ms. Beene, a Southern Baptist. ``And with God's leadership, we can change this problem.'' The religious leaders were dropped off at about 1 a.m. Monday at a gathering spot for the homeless under an elevated freeway near downtown, where about 40 people have made camp. The clergymen spent the rest of the night wandering about the city, stopping at Tranquillity Park, City Hall and Sam Houston Park. ``Most of the homeless you never see,'' said the Rev. Steve Bancroft of Trinity Episcopal Church. ``The ones who end up on the street are those who've run out of options.'' 
Workers today pulled two more bodies from the murky waters of Guanabara Bay, raising to 53 the number of confirmed deaths in the New Year's Eve sinking of a sightseeing boat. One of the bodies found today was identified as that of Paolo Mantegazza of Turin, Italy, according to Valmir Rabelo of the Fire Department's Maritime Group. He had been reported missing by the Italian consulate in Rio. The other body, a woman, was not identified immediately. Police have said they would seek homicide charges against two cruise officials and two port guards in connection with the sinking. Authorities said Monday they were investigating allegations that the guards were paid to let the boat sail overloaded into choppy waters. It was still not clear how many passengers were missing because cruise operators said the passenger list went down with the 100-foot flat-bottomed craft. Estimates of those on board ranged from 130 to 150, but it was not known how many were rescued by nearby boats. Tables, chairs and a broken wooden staircase on the sunken boat blocked an underwater search Monday, said Col. Jefferson Cardoso de Bem, who heads the Fire Department's Maritime Group. The double-decked Bateau Mouche was carrying revelers who paid $220 a ticket to dance, drink and watch fireworks off Copacabana Beach when it sank Saturday night in about 65 feet of water at the mouth of Guanabara Bay near Rio's Sugar Loaf mountain. The navy released a statement Monday that conflicted with reports of witnesses who said the boat was overloaded and lacked enough life jackets. The statement said navy inspectors checked the craft on Wednesday, finding ``satisfactory safety and navigational conditions'' and ``a number of lifejackets above what was necessary.'' The navy statement also confirmed survivors' reports that the boat was inspected again two hours before it capsized. It said ``there were 149 people aboard ... within a permitted capacity of 153.'' Precinct police chief Irineu Barroso, who is in charge of the case, said he would seek homicide charges against the owner of Itatiaia Turismo, the tourist agency that booked the trip; the owner of the Sol e Mar restaurant that operated the boat; and two port authority guards who stopped the boat Saturday then allowed it to continue its trip. Barroso said he would also seek charges of corruption and accepting bribes against the guards. There have been no arrests in the case. ``After taking statements from survivors, we can see something was not right,'' Barroso said. ``I believe someone will go to jail for this.'' The navy said it would investigate ``rumors of bribes or negligence'' regarding the patrol boat guards who inspected the boat. TV Globo, the country's largest commercial network, said Monday there were reports of up to 30 more victims trapped inside the wreckage. ``We could find more bodies caught inside the boat,'' de Bem said. ``But it's hard to tell. No one has an accurate idea how many survivors there are, and our divers are having problems searching the boat and the visibility is very bad.'' Rio de Janeiro state Gov. Wellington Moreira Franco suspended Itatiaia's Turismo's operating license. 
Jim Bakker returned to the TV pulpit with his wife for the first time in two years, and blamed his downfall and subsequent indictment on Satan, not on PTL's sex-and-money scandal. ``I believe the devil said, `I have to smash Jim and Tammy Bakker,''' he told viewers Monday on the first broadcast of ``The Jim and Tammy Show.'' Bakker and his wife, Tammy Faye, made no direct pitch for contributions Monday but on this morning's show Bakker promised a book in exchange for donations. The hourlong program is scheduled to run five days a week. ``We don't want to raise funds on this program every day,'' Bakker said today, adding that ``for everyone who sends $100, or $25 or more, I want you to have a copy of this `Crisis Book of Scripture.''' The book contains biblical quotations that can help readers deal with life crises such as divorce, he said. ``We're still believing God will restore Heritage (USA) totally and back to the lifetime members who built it,'' Bakker said. The broadcasts originated in the living room of the Bakkers' borrowed home and was sent by satellite to a half-dozen stations, mostly cable, in California, Ohio, New York, Pennsylvania and Louisiana, Bakker said. ``Jim, I think this is probably the happiest day of my life,'' Mrs. Bakker said as the show began Monday. She wore her trademark heavy eye makeup and broke into tears two minutes into the hourlong show. Bakker, 49, and a former top associate were indicted last month on charges of diverting $4 million in PTL money for their benefit. The Bakkers had not preached together on television since January 1987. Two months later, allegations surfaced of his 1980 sexual encounter with church secretary Jessica Hahn. Bakker said his last television show at PTL featured the groundbreaking for the Crystal Palace Church, a proposed 30,000-seat church at PTL's Heritage USA. The church was never built and a federal bankruptcy court last month approved the sale of Heritage USA to a Canadian businessman. Bakker, however, holding a drawing of the glass church, said he had not given up. ``I believe that someday we will still build it,'' Bakker said. ``I believe that was the last straw for Satan. I think the devil was mad that something so beautiful was being built.'' Callers to a ``prayer line'' telephone number Monday _ not toll-free _ were asked to give their name and prayer request but were not asked directly for funds. Bakker frequently referred to the family's recent experience. ``You can make it,'' he said. ``If Jim and Tammy can survive their holocaust of two years, I know God will help you to survive. There's times when I did not want to live. There's times when I prayed to die. But I know this: God was always there.'' It is unknown yet how many people watched the show. ``We honestly don't know how many may be carrying it or portions of it today, because it simply went up on the satellite,'' said the Bakker's attorney, Jim Toms. One city Bakker named as receiving Monday's broadcast did not. Steve Burleson, president of Asheville Christian Cable Network, said he didn't carry the program and hasn't decided whether to televise it. ``I'm all for presenting the gospel of Jesus Christ, but I'm simply not interested in another wall-to-wall begging program,'' he said. ``And I think that's the consensus of the viewers here.'' 
Vice President-elect Dan Quayle resigned from the Senate today and his successor, Republican Dan Coats, was sworn in immediately. ``Today is the day I officially leave the United States Senate,'' Quayle said at the swearing-in ceremony in his office in the Hart Office Building. ``It's been eight great years ... (and) I am looking forward to the challenge of the next eight years.'' Quayle will be sworn in as vice president Jan. 20. Coats was sworn in by Indiana Gov. Robert Orr, who appointed him to Quayle's seat. Also present at the swearing-in were Mrs. Quayle, Coats' wife and children, and the state's senior senator, Republican Richard Lugar. ``I am deeply grateful for the governor's confidence in me,'' Coats said. He noted it was Quayle who first drew him into public service 12 years ago, and Coats worked for Quayle for 3{ years. ``Now he's becoming my boss again as president of the Senate,'' Coats said. Quayle's only public advice to his successor was to work hard. Quayle said he has not decided how much time he will spend in his capacity as Senate president after he takes office as vice president. 
A member on Michigan Democratic Rep. Bob Carr's staff helped plaster the nation's capital with posters urging the ouster of Washington Mayor Marion Barry, a spokesman for the congressman said today. District of Columbia police said the ``Dump Barry'' signs first appeared Monday morning, after a week in which the mayor was criticized widely for visiting a hotel room where police later found traces of cocaine. Paul Frick, 25, an assistant on Carr's staff, was in a car seen traveling through the city putting up the signs, said Jeff Eller, Carr's press secretary. Eller said Frick, a Washington resident for four years, has been reprimanded. ``This has nothing to do with the congressman,'' he said. ``Our office is in no way involved in any of this kind of activity.'' Frick was at work today but would not comment on the incident. Barry has denied any involvement with drugs but has acknowledged visiting Charles Lewis, a former city employee, at a downtown hotel several times last month. Police investigators discovered traces of cocaine in the hotel room after Lewis checked out on Dec. 23, but could not say how long the drug had been there. 
Nancy Gardner hangs out on the subway platform defiantly chain-smoking, a tough customer in leather and denim. Other commuters give her wide berth. Anybody can see she's looking for trouble. And when it arrives _ often in groups of teen-age thugs who victimize people in and around subway stations _ Gardner wants nothing more than to get in the thick of it. For the last three months, that's been her job. As part of an elite, 23-officer plainclothes unit of the transit police known as the Repeat Offender Robbery Strike Force, Gardner and her partner, Officer Roger Fanti, spend hours loitering around subway stations, waiting for crime to happen and trying to ensure that the subway offers no escape. So far, the unit has chalked up 42 arrests, and Gardner is responsible for eight of those. ``I especially get satisfaction out of robbery arrests,'' said Gardner, 26, who at 5-foot-4 and 110 pounds, has had to push around perpetrators twice her size. ``A lot of bad guys show no remorse and don't think twice about taking people's property and leaving them injured and bleeding. We try to get the best possible case so they do time.'' One evening during the busy Christmas shopping season, Gardner and Fanti spent hours following a group of teen-agers as they tried to rob a shopper at Macy's, wandered in and out of the subway and nearby stores and finally made a grab for racks of clothes from one shop. Four of the would-be shoplifters ended up in handcuffs, and Gardner suffered a bruised knee in the struggle. She knows that violence comes with the job, but it is a job she always has wanted to do. ``When I was growing up, I always thought cops were heros,'' said Gardner, a 3{-year veteran of the transit police who hopes to become a detective. ``Now I want to make a difference for my son. Every little bit counts.'' 
The government will open the archives of the Ottoman Empire to clear up charges that 1.5 million Armenians were massacred by Ottoman Turks during World War I, according to a report published Tuesday. Foreign Minister Mesut Yilmaz told the Istanbul daily Milliyet the archives were not in organized form and at least 10 years were needed to put the documents in order. ``But we will release to the scholars the documents related to the Armenian incident in four months,'' Yilmaz said. In the summer of 1915, a crumbling Ottoman Empire regarded Armenians as a dangerous foreign element with friends and cousins among the Russian enemy. The Ottomans accused the Armenians living in eastern Turkey of helping the invading Russians during World War I and ordered the whole Armenian population deported to Syria. Armenians were rounded up, their homes destroyed and their property seized. Hundreds of thousands died from beatings, starvation and exposure during the trip. Turkish officials have disputed the 1.5 million figure, saying there were only 1.4 million Armenians living in Turkey at the turn of the century. They say 300,000 Armenians were killed in the turmoil of deportations and local reprisals. Historians have estimated 600,000 dead. Both sides claim to have documents proving their version of the events and brand as forgeries documents that support the other side's claim. A group of prominent Turkish historians interviewed by the semi-official Anatolia News Agency on Tuesday welcomed the news that the Ottoman archives would be opened up soon for scholarly research. They said, however, that the move should have been made earlier. ``If the Ottoman archives had been made public earlier, the Armenian issue would not have become so gangrenous by now,'' said Attila Ilhan, a poet who has also written historical novels. Armenian underground organizations killed 30 Turkish officials and their dependents abroad from 1973-84 in revenge for the alleged massacre of Armenians. 
Family members who serve as judge, prosecutor and defense attorney in Dyer County Juvenile Court say they work hard at avoiding conflicts of interest. ``It looks like a kangaroo court,'' said James O. Lanier, the public defender. His brother, David W. Lanier, is the juvenile court judge. The public defender's son, James E. Lanier, is a prosecutor. Judge Lanier requires all attorneys, defendants and parents to sign a waiver before he hears a case in which his brother or nephew are attorneys. The waiver acknowledges that everyone is aware of the relationships. So far, no one has refused to sign. But the judge, who has been on the bench in this western Tennessee community since 1982, said he does not believe his nephew should prosecute cases in his courtroom. ``I don't think there will be any conflict of interest, but it's not good practice for the three of us to all be in the courtroom,'' he said. But James E. Lanier said he sees no conflict. ``None of us are in collusion with each other,'' he said. State Attorney General Charles W. Burson has issued a legal opinion requested by James O. Lanier saying the arrangement violates no state law. Gil Campbell, executive director of the Tennessee Bar Association, declined to comment. Other Tennessee officials said it is common for parties in legal proceedings to be related, but not to the extent of the Laniers. James O. Lanier, the public defender, also has asked the state Board of Professional Responsibility for an ethics opinion on the matter. The board is made up of nine private attorneys appointed by the state Supreme Court to supervise the legal profession. James O. Lanier and his son practiced law together for seven years before the younger Lanier became assistant district attorney general in October.  
The government will more than double its police force to prevent violence during February's parliamentary elections, a police official said Tuesday. The government will recruit 38,000 extra police officers, increasing the size of the force to 64,000 before the elections, said the police official, who requested anonymity. The need to increase the police force is apparently due to soldiers being withdrawn to their barracks by Jan. 15. New President Ranasinghe Premadasa has said he won't extend emergency laws beyond that date. The laws gave powers to the military to detain militants from Sinhalese and Tamil communities who have vowed to disrupt the elections. National elections were called for Feb. 15 by former President Junius R. Jayewardene, who left office on Tuesday after 11 years in power. Voters will elect 225 Parliament members to six-year terms. Sinhalese militants are waging an anti-government campaign to protest a July 1987 peace plan offered to Tamil rebels fighting for a separate homeland in northeast Sri Lanka. The mostly Hindu Tamils form 18 percent of Sri Lanka's 16 million people, but are a majority in the northeast. At least 8,500 people have been killed since Tamil rebels launched their campaign for a separate state in 1983. The Sinhalese anti-government campaing has claimed at least another 1,000 victims. In the latest violence Monday, at least five people, including a ruling party candidate for next month's elections, were shot and killed, police said. U.M.S. Dassanayake, the candidate for the Yapahuwa electorate in the Northcentral Province, was killed at his residence, by gunmen believed to be Sinhalese militants, police said. In the north, a village leader was killed by Tamil rebels, they said. The other victims included at least three Sinhalese extremists, whose bodies were found in a southern town, police said. They were believed to have been shot by a pro-government group opposed to the militants. 
The Concise Oxford Dictionary has offered a compromise in its long-running quarrel with Jewish groups over its inclusion of the word ``Jew'' as a racial slur. The Jewish campaigners say they welcome the change but believe it's not enough. The disputed entry defines ``Jew'' as ``1. person of Hebrew descent; person whose religion is Judaism... 2. (derog., colloq.; R) person who drives hard bargains, usurer. ...'' And as a verb: ``(derog., colloq.; R) cheat, bargain with (person) to lower his price.'' ``Derog., colloq.; R'' stands for ``derogatory, colloquial, racially offensive.'' According to a letter from S.J. Tulloch, senior assistant editor of the dictionary, to the Council of Christians and Jews, the next edition will add: ``The stereotype, which is now deeply offensive, arose from historical associations of Jews as money-lenders in medieval England.'' The aim, Mrs. Tulloch wrote, is to put things into context. But council director Canon Jim Richardson said he wished the dictionary simply would drop all the pejorative definitions. Mrs. Tulloch wrote that dictionaries had to record, not to pass judgment, and that ``Jew'' pejoratively ``is still current both as a noun and as a verb.'' Richardson, an Anglican clergyman whose organization fosters Christian-Jewish understanding, disagreed. ``She said it was in common practice. We actually doubt that and ask: Is it really in use? Couldn't it be left out?'' ``The Jewish community is very sensitive about the definition of `Jew' in the Oxford Dictionary,'' he said in an interview. ``The definition of `Jew' as a usurer, as a person who strikes a hard bargain, promotes an anti-Jewish attitude.'' He said the lexicographers' latest step was ``very much a move in the right direction, but we won't be satisfied until it (the definition) is scrapped, because it is dangerous.'' Mrs. Tulloch wrote: ``The meaning of Jew that you mention is certainly offensive, but that is not grounds for omitting it from the dictionary, nor does our inclusion of it imply that we condone its use in this sense. Instead, it should be carefully labeled, so that the reader understands the context in which it exists.'' Shimon Cohen, a spokesman for Lord Jakobovitz, the chief rabbi of Britain, said he was ``somewhat pleased'' with the proposed change, but also wanted the pejorative definitions removed altogether. Other British dictionaries also include pejorative definitions of ``Jew.'' Chambers 20th Century Dictionary, published in Scotland, defines the word as ``usurer, miser.'' The Longman Dictionary of the English Language attributes its origin to ``the alleged sharpness of Jews in business dealings.'' Chambers, Longman and Oxford also list the meanings of ``kike,'' ``sheeny,'' ``wog,'' ``nigger'' and ``chink'' with notations that they are offensive slang. In the United States, Webster's New World Dictionary has restored obscene words and racial slurs after prolonged banishment. David B. Guralnik, editor-in-chief until his recent retirement, expunged the words in the 1970s in a practice mocked by some British lexicographers as ``Guralnikism,'' but restored them in the latest edition published in September. The verb to ``jew'' is defined in Webster's as ``to swindle; cheat; gyp'' with the warning: ``This is a vulgar and offensive usage even when not consciously expressing an anti-Semitic attitude.'' ``Times have changed,'' said the present editor in chief, Victoria Neufeldt. ``There is far more acceptance in print of all the vulgar terms and what David Guralnik called the true obscenities _ ethnic slurs.'' In a telephone interview from her Cleveland office, she said she did not think dictionary inclusion of such words encouraged their usage. ``Putting `ain't' in the dictionary hasn't made `ain't' more acceptable. Dictionaries don't have that power,'' she said. In 1973, Marcus Shloimovitz, an English Jewish textile merchant, took the Oxford Dictionary to court to force it to stop defining a Jew as ``a grasping or extortionate money-lender or usurer.'' He argued that ``the Jewish race includes sages, scholars, judges, scientists and people from the arts and stage. They have done great service for their countries. They are not cheats or unscrupulous usurers.'' Shloimovitz lost because he failed to prove the dictionary entries caused him personal suffering. But the lexicographers subsequently toned down the disputed definitions. 
The ACT, the predominant college entrance test in 28 Midwestern and Western states, will be revised in October to offer a more detailed evaluation of students' reading, science and math skills. Since the exam taken by nearly 1 million college-bound students each year was devised in 1959, colleges that were once seen as institutions for the academically elite now deal with a greater variety of students, including an increasing number with remedial needs. ``There is a much more heterogenous group going to college,'' said Richard L. Ferguson, president of the American College Testing Program in Iowa City. ``As colleges are challenged by students with a broad range of skills, they need better information for placement.'' The new exam, which will be lengthened by 15 minutes to two hours and 55 minutes, will supply colleges with 12 scores and subscores to give a more detailed assessment of students. The current ACT consists of five scores: in English, math, social science, natural science, and a composite score. The new test will provide three scores in English: a total score, and subscores in mechanical skills and rhetorical skills. An expanded math test will provide a total score and separate subscores in pre-algebra and elementary algebra, intermediate algebra and coordinate geometry, and in plane geometry and trigonometry. A section on reading skills will provide and total score and two subscores: one in social studies and science, and a second in art and literature. The ACT also will include a new science reasoning test. ``What we are really doing is generating a new reading test that really measures reading skills, and another test in science that really measures science skills,'' Ferguson said. Booklets outlining the changes, which were the result of eight years of review, are to be mailed out the first week in February to high schools and colleges, Ferguson said. 
U.S. troops will remain in South Korea as long as the threat from North Korea remains and as long as South Koreans desire their presence, outgoing U.S. Ambassador James R. Lilley said Tuesday. A majority of the people in South Korea believes the U.S. military presence is ``still necessary to ensure the security of Korea,'' Lilley said in departing Seoul, pointing to polls showing that 60 percent wanted the troops to stay. About 42,000 American troops are stationed here under a mutual defense pact. Echoing North Korea's calls, some radicals in South Korea have demanded the U.S. troops pull out, saying they obstruct reunification. In view of North Korea's military presence and its invasion in 1950 that started the three-year Korean War, the diplomat said, ``It is essential that we stay strong, well-prepared and well-trained.'' He said the annual U.S.-South Korean military exercises are necessary for bilateral security. North Korea last week called for an end to the exercise in a meeting with South Korean lawmakers in Panmunjom to try to arrange parliamentary talks to improve relations. North Korea said an end to the exercise was a precondition to progress in such talks. Lilley also said Washington ``fully supports'' South Korean President Roh Tae-woo's proposals to promote dialogue and reduce tensions with North Korea and develop better relations with socialist countries. Citing South Korea's economic growth, Lilley said the United Sates ``will continue to seek a fair chance for U.S. firms to compete in the Korean market,'' while calling on Seoul to further liberalize its economy, including its import and capital markets. South Korea posted a trade surplus of about $10 billion with the United States last year. He cautioned that ``there will be problems ahead and we will not always agree on how best to solve them. Nevertheless, I am confident of the future. There is an underlying mutuality of interests which characterizes the U.S.-Korea economic relationship.'' 
Racial tension spread to Beijing on Tuesday as about 200 Chinese students demonstrated against an alleged attack on a Chinese woman by an African student. Posters calling for tighter campus security appeared at two colleges. The protest and class boycott at the Beijing Languages Institute was the third incident between Chinese and Africans in the last nine days in China, and the first to occur in the capital. Chinese officials in Nanking denied African allegations that Chinese paramilitary forces beat and used electric truncheons to shock African students during a clash Saturday. They also said four Africans involved in a Dec. 24 brawl with Chinese had been expelled from a Nanking university. Of the four, one has been arrested and three detained for questioning. A third racially related incident continued in Hangzhou, where 56 African students have been boycotting classes for a week because they allege Chinese authorities say they all have AIDS. In Beijing, Chinese students marched for two hours, carrying banners in Chinese and English. ``Hooligans Go Home'' and ``We Demand A Safe Campus,'' said two banners in Chinese. A banner in English said, ``No Offend Women's Rights.'' Chinese students said the last boycott involved about 2,000 students. Final exams are Saturday, so classes are important. Students said they wanted their school to fix locks on dormitory doors, provide better lighting and upgrade security. They said they wanted foreign students ``to respect Chinese customs.'' Chinese students also put up wall posters criticizing the leadership of the Student Union at the institute, which they said organized the action but did not participate because it was afraid. ``We don't need this kind of leadership,'' said one of the posters about the school-appointed group. ``Student Union, get the hell out of China!'' A wall poster, titled ``Whither Respect?'' was posted at Beijing University, China's most prestigious college. ``The languages institute school is forever forgiving such incidents,'' the poster said. ``We want to know why Chinese women have to continually suffer such treatment.'' Another poster told the story of the racially related incident in Nanking. According to Chinese and foreign students, the problem at the Beijing Languages Institute occurred at 4:30 a.m. Sunday when a Chinese student went to the bathroom and was accosted by an African student in her third floor dormitory hall. They said the African sneaked into the woman's room while she was in the bathroom and attempted to grab her when she returned. She screamed and ran down the stairs. On the second floor she slipped on some broken glass and severely cut her leg, Chinese students said. ``I saw him run after her,'' said one of the student's roommates, who was awakened by her classmates' cries. ``She was yelling, `Save me! Save me!''' She said her roommate could not speak to a reporter because ``all she can do is cry.'' African students at the languages institute said they did not know exactly what happened Sunday. They said they believed Chinese were using the incident as an excuse to oppose relationships between foreign men and Chinese women. Relations between Chinese and Africans are tense. Chinese often are openly racist and Africans are frustrated by a culture that is very different than their own. The tensions become explosive when Chinese women are involved. Cbinese students are also unhappy with the way the government and their schools are treating them and have jumped on the African issue as a pretext to vent complex feelings of discontent about their position in society. Last week, thousands of Chinese in Nanking demonstrated against African students following a fight Dec. 24 over Chinese women. Su Xiaoxun, an official at the Jiangsu province foreign affairs office, denied allegations by African student and diplomats that Chinese forces attacked and tortured Africans at a guest house Saturday. Daouda Diakite, a 24-year-old student from Mali, said Chinese militia shocked his classmates on their genitals. The 140 mostly African students had been forced to the guest house on Dec. 26 following the African-Chinese clash and anti-black protests during which thousands of youths threw rocks at African dormitories and destroyed property there. On Monday, a diplomat from Ghana, Y.N. Ohene-Akrasi, said China had broken its promise not to move the students from the guest house until an African delegation returned to Nanking. On Tuesday, the chairman of the delegation, the ambassador from the Congo, went to the Foreign Ministry but it ``refused to grant him any audience'' to discuss the situation in Nanking, he said. 
Public school teachers from California, Louisiana, Maryland and Virginia were named finalists Tuesday in the 1989 National Teacher of the Year contest. The contest, which started in 1952, is sponsored by Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc., Good Housekeeping magazine and the Council of Chief State School Officers. The winner will be honored at a White House ceremony in April. This year's finalists were selected by a panel of educators from Teachers of the Year named in the 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and American Samoa. They are: _Jenlane Gee, 32, a third-grade teacher at Christine Sipherd Elementary School in Modesto, Calif. Gee, a first-generation Chinese-American, developed a drug-awareness program and a young astronauts program in her school. _Gary L. Stringer, 34, a science teacher at West Monroe High School in West Monroe, La. Stringer has developed a college-level geology course for high school students and a zookeeper program for teen-agers. He quit a job as a geologist for Exxon to enter classroom teaching. _Leslie Jean Roche, 37, an eighth-grade social studies teacher at Parkland Junior High School in Rockville, Md. Roche coordinates an annual multiethnic festival at her school and organized the first racially integrated student dance at a rural Maryland high school. _Mary V. Bicouvaris, 49, a government-international relations teacher at Bethel High School in Hampton, Va. Bicouvaris, a Greek immigrant, advises the school's award-winning Model United Nations Club and has written a booklet on her techniques for interdisciplinary study of the U.S. Constitution. 
Six people have been convicted of looting in the wake of the Armenian earthquake, including a man who received an eight-year sentence for stealing food and three others sentenced for taking an empty safe, a newspaper said Tuesday. The report in Sovietskaya Rossiya was the first on sentencing of looters in the Dec. 7 earthquake that devastated much of northern Armenia. It said the sentences were handed out by the Armenian Supreme Court, but did not say when nor whether they would be served in labor camp or prison. V. Manukyan, 36, of Yerevan, ``using the general grief on the first day after the earthquake,'' stole about $2,600 worth of food from a storage house in Leninakan, the report said. He was caught and given an eight-year sentence, the newspaper said. S. Oganesyan, a driver for the Armenian Education Ministry and two friends, A. Gevorkyan and V. Borzikh, stole a safe from the ruins of a bakery in Spitak, the paper said. ``Each was given six years _ and that only because the safe turned out to be empty. In other circumstances the sentence would have been stiffer,'' it said. The newspaper also reported that A. Babayan, 22, was sentenced to five years for passing himself off in Spitak as an ambulance doctor and stealing gold from bodies. A sixth person, R. Ayrapetyan, was given three years for stealing from cars in Leninakan. The Armenian Academy of Sciences reported several new tremors Saturday, Sunday and Monday, according to editors of the official Armenian news agency Armenpress. A temblor hit Spitak at 8:10 a.m. Saturday, registering 6.5 on the 12-point Soviet scale, which is different from the Richter scale. A quake of that magnitude can knock pictures from walls and slightly damage buildings, but almost all of Spitak already was destroyed. Armenpress editors also said the Academy of Sciences reported five minor tremors Sunday in Leninakan and Kirovakan, and six tremors Monday. The editors said that reports six people were killed by one of the aftershocks were ``only rumors.'' The official Tass news agency also denied reports broadcast in France and Britain that 17 survivors had been found recently in Spitak. ``The last living person was removed by rescuers from the ruins of buildings and structures in Spitak 10 days ago,'' Norik Muradyan, chief of rescue operations in the city, told Tass. ``The Western press reports that supposedly 17 living people were found in Spitak on the 24th day after the natural disaster have no foundation,'' Muradyan was quoted as telling Tass. Since Dec. 29, the bodies of 28 more earthquake victims have been pulled from the rubble, bringing the total recovered bodies to 24,888, Tass said. 
The 101st Congress convened today with leaders of the Democratic-controlled chambers pledging cooperation with a George Bush White House, but with tensions already mounting within the Capitol over a proposed hefty pay raise for lawmakers. President-elect Bush, acting in his role as vice president, gaveled the Senate into session and then immediately administered the oath of office to the new and re-elected senators in groups of four. The Senate chamber was outfitted with new gold curtains behind the presiding officer's chair and new carpet throughout. There were new benches upholstered in bright scarlet for staff members. ``It's all for television,'' said Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich., showing off the accommodations to constituents. The galleries were packed with spectators, including Lady Byrd Johnson, widow of the late president and mother-in-law of Virginia's new Democratic Sen. Chuck Robb. In the House, the chamber was packed by members, their families and friends as Texas Democrat Jim Wright was re-elected speaker in a party-line vote of 253-170 with two members voting ``present,'' over Republican leader Bob Michel of Illinois. The speaker entered the chamber to a standing ovation before leading the mass swearing-in ceremony. Democrats hold strong majorities in both chambers, 55-45 in the Senate and 259-174 in the House. Today, there was talk of cooperation with Bush from leaders of both parties. ``By working together, we can help our new president fulfill his promise of `a kinder, gentler America','' Wright said in his statement accepting re-election. ``We're very optimistic that we're going to be able to work with President-elect) Bush and we can solve some of the problems,'' said Rep. Tony Coelho, D-Calif., House majority whip. ``We need to have that cooperation. ... We'd like to resolve some problems and get rid of some of this confrontation.'' ``I think at least at the outset ... the appropriate tone is one of cooperation and a spirit of bipartisanship, and let's see how far we can go with that,'' said Rep. Dick Cheney, R-Wyo., House minority whip. Moving to get a jump on other lawmakers, Rep. Tom Tauke, R-Iowa, announced a bill to force roll-call votes before Congress accepts any pay increase, and delay any approved raise two years _ until after the next election. Under current law, Congress automatically gets a boost proposed by the president unless it votes it down. ``Congressional pay adjustments have become a perpetual source of debate, controversy and embarrassment,'' Tauke said. President Reagan is expected to call for a substantial pay raise next week for members of Congress to take effect March 1 unless rejected before then by both houses. An advisory commission has recommended a 50 percent boost for lawmakers, federal judges, and top executive branch officials, with members of Congress giving up lucrative honorariums in exchange. Current congressional pay is $89,500 a year, and the commission's proposal would raise it to $135,000. ``If the president goes ahead and proposes a pay raise we're prepared to go ahead and eliminate the honorariums,'' Coelho said. While the Democratic-controlled Congress awaits Reagan's proposal on the pay issue, on most of the nation's biggest issues it's waiting for the new president-elect to make his positions known. Lawmakers from both parties reaffirmed today their hope that relations with the Bush White House will be good. But Cheney and Coelho, interviewed on ``CBS This Morning'', had differing views on possible tax increases. ``None of us would like to increase taxes but we're willing to listen and watch and we hope that as we get into this, and we have to get to the crunch, that if he (Bush) can't reach the magic number without raising revenue, that he would say so and we would go ahead and do it,'' Coelho said. ``I think the American people voted overwhelmingly in opposition to a tax increase and I don't believe that he should be giving away or making a concession on that point before we even sit down at the table to negotiate,'' said Cheney. New and re-elected members of the House and Senate were being sworn in today, and then the two chambers scheduled organizational chores for two days. Among them: a joint session on Wednesday to count the electoral votes for president. After completing its organizational chores, Congress will adjourn until Jan. 20, although hearings could start before then on some of Bush's legislative proposals. President Reagan sends his final budget to Congress Jan. 9, and Bush is expected to submit his own ideas after taking office. Before fiscal 1990 begins Oct. 1, Congress and the new president must agree on how to cut more than $25 billion in spending, or to raise taxes, in order to meet the goals of the Gramm-Rudman budget balancing law. Awaiting Bush's proposals before offering their own are House Speaker Jim Wright, D-Texas, and the Senate's new majority leader, George Mitchell of Maine. Mitchell succeeds Sen. Robert C. Byrd, D-W.Va., who will also play a key fiscal role as he moves over to the chairmanship of the Appropriations Committee. Bush pledged repeatedly during the campaign he would not support any new taxes, but many Democrats are openly skeptical he can keep that promise. Among the doubters are the chairmen of the House and Senate Budget committees _ both new to those posts _ Rep. Leon Panetta, D-Calif., and Sen. Jim Sasser, D-Tenn. Sasser has publicly predicted that Bush would be coming to Congress within two years asking for a tax increase. Bob Michel, R-Ill., who returns as the House minority leader, said he suspects some new taxes might have to be combined with spending cuts for the deficit goals to be achieved. ``I suspect down the road a piece that may be part of the answer,'' Michel said in a television interview last weekend. Sen. Bob Dole of Kansas, re-elected Senate Republican leader, said he hasn't seen any indications that Bush is softening his anti-tax position. But he warned demands on the federal till are increasing, including tens of billions of dollars needed to bail out failing savings institutions and to reopen the nation's nuclear weapons plants, which have been plagued by safety problems. 
Construction spending rose 0.8 percent in November, reflecting an increase in work on homes and government projects that more than offset slower building of offices and shopping malls, the Commerce Department reported Tuesday. November's seasonally adjusted construction spending _ at an annual rate of $411.1 billion _ marked the third consecutive monthly increase. Revised figures put spending at $407.8 billion in October, $406.9 billion in September and $403.2 billion in August. For the first 11 months of 1988, construction spending was up a lackluster 1 percent over the same period of 1987. That figure was not adjusted for increased construction costs, which were up 1.5 percent. The November spending increase was largely driven by a increase in spending on housing construction, which was up 0.7 percent to $200.4 billion. The housing figure included a 2.3 percent rise in spending on single-family homes. There was a 1.9 percent decrease in apartment construction. Economists said that reflected after-effects of the 1986 federal tax overhaul, which made such projects less attractive, and high apartment vacancy rates, particularly in the South. ``Until we see vacancy rates decline, we're not going to see a whole heck of a lot of construction in those markets,'' said Mark Obrinsky of the U.S. League of Savings Institutions. Rising mortgage interest rates likely will dampen growth in single-family housing in 1989, said John Savacool, an economist with the Wefa Group, a Bala Cynwyd, Pa., forecasting firm. He said recent increases in single-family construction ``aren't going to stick.'' However, Obrinsky predicted another reasonably strong year for single-family homes, though not equal to 1988. He said mortgage rates could drop in the second half of the year and ``take some sting'' out of expected increases early in the year. Spending on non-residential construction was down a seasonally adjusted 0.8 percent in November to $92.3 billion, including a 2.5 percent drop in work on office buildings. There was a 1.3 percent increase in spending on factories and other industrial projects, and Savacool said that was a result of continued strong export markets. While companies first increase production by investing in new equipment, ``eventually you have to build some new structures to put additional equipment in,'' he said. ``It's finally starting to show up.'' The weakness in office construction, meanwhile, reflects high vacancy rates, Obrinsky said. ``The same has been true for shopping centers and malls,'' he said. ``They seem to have been a bit overbuilt.'' Hotel and motel construction was up 6.6 percent for the month and other commercial projects, such as shopping malls, were down 2.2 percent. Spending on construction of government projects was up 4 percent in November to $81 billion, including a 2.7 percent increase in the largest category of highways. Also up was spending on construction on schools and sewer systems. 
A man stole an unoccupied transit authority bus today and drove it through three counties as police gave chase, and at least 14 people were injured, authorities said. The half-hour chase ended when the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority bus crashed into a tree in front of a shop. Middletown Police Chief Frank McKenna said Middletown officer Leroy Alexander, 39, was injured when he was struck by the bus as police vainly tried to halt it by setting up a roadblock of squad cars midway through the chase. Details were still sketchy, but at least 12 people were reported injured in a pileup related to the chase, authorities said. The driver, who was not immediately identified, was also injured, authorities said. Transportation authority spokesman James Whitaker said the bus was stolen from a depot in Philadelphia shortly before 7 a.m. ``He apparently drove it to a number of locations before the chase began,'' Whitaker said. Authorities began the pursuit in Middletown Township in Bucks County, north of the city, when the bus was spotted on a road that has no transit route, McKenna said. State police Sgt. Hal Lacey said the bus eventually came south on a state highway, with at least one state police car and four local police cars in pursuit. When the bus became bogged down in traffic, police cars pulled in front to try to end the chase, he said. When the traffic cleared, the bus rammed two police cars and hit the police officer before leaving the scene. The bus went through a portion of Philadelphia into Lower Moreland Township, in Montgomery County, where it finally stopped after ramming a tree. Elle Rudolph, a spokeswoman for St. Mary Hospital in Langhorne, said Alexander was in guarded condition with multiple injuries. Edward Ennis, a police dispatcher in Lower Moreland township, said several people suffered serious injuries in a traffic accident that was caused by the pursuit. Between five and 12 cars ran into each other at an intersection a couple of blocks from the place where the bus finally came to rest, either because they had been hit by the bus or because they were trying to avoid it, authorities said. A dispatcher who declined to give her name said 10 injured people were taken to Holy Redeemer Hospital and Medical Center, two were taken to Abington Memorial Hospital and one was flown by helicopter to Hahnemann University Hospital. Abington spokeswoman Linda Miller said one of the two injured persons at that hospital was the 35-year-old man who had driven the bus. The man's name and condition were not immediately released. Ennis said the chase ended when the bus hit a tree in front of the Huntingdon Valley Cheese Shop in Lower Moreland township northwest of the city. The chase ``caused pretty bad'' traffic tieups in the area, Ennis said. 
Foreign Minister Moshe Arens complained Tuesday that European nations were making Middle East peace moves without consulting Israel, and he said his nation was willing to suffer isolation in the world for its own security. Four members of Israel's parliament, meanwhile, planned to defy Israeli law and meet with officials of the Palestine Liberation Organization. In the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, three Palestinians were reported wounded in clashes with soldiers, and troops demolished or sealed three houses of Arabs suspected of attacks on soldiers or Arabs cooperating with Israeli authorities. Three residents of Gaza's Jabalya refugee camp were sentenced to 14 years in prison each for throwing firebombs, taking part in riots or belonging to groups organizing the nearly 13-month-old Palestinian uprising, the army said. Arens, in his first news conference with foreign reporters, criticized the U.S. decision to hold talks with the PLO. He emphasized that negotiating with the PLO could not further the peace process, but he refused to outline Israel's plans for reaching peace with the Palestinians and its Arab neighbors. Arens said Israel does not approve of the European Community's plan, announced Monday, to start a Middle East peace initiative by encouraging an international conference on the region. ``I think it would be better if prior to undertaking any kind of intitiative, the members of the European Community were to meet with us,'' he said. ``I think there is probably no reason why European countries should not listen with considerable attention to our opinions, to our feelings.'' Arens, 63, became foreign minister with the formation of Israel's new government Dec. 22. He is a member of the Likud bloc of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, which has opposed an international Middle East peace conference. Arens, a former ambassador to Washington, also criticized the U.S. talks with the PLO, saying: ``We are concerned that this decision might impair our ability to fight the plague of international terrorism.'' Asked if Israel felt isolated by the Europeans and the United States, Arens said his government does not welcome isolation but will accept it if necessary for its security. ``We should not be expected to take any step that might decrease the sense of isolation ... if they are steps that would endanger the state of Israel,'' he said. Also Tuesday, an Israeli legislator said he and three colleagues plan to attend a European symposium on the Middle East, defying a ban on meetings with PLO officials. ``We have to speak to the Palestinians directly and reach peace with them through compromise,'' said legislator Lova Eliav. ``Our generation must speak to the Palestinian leadership, and the Palestinian leadership is the PLO.'' Those attending the meeting in Paris on Jan. 12-13 include Eliav and Ora Namir of the mainstream Labor Party, Yair Tsaban of the socialist Mapam Party, and Shulamit Aloni of the left-wing Citizens Rights Movement. The PLO is banned in Israel and meetings with its members are illegal, but the four legislators have parliamentary immunity. Recent opinion polls show a majority of Israelis support talks with the PLO. In Jabalya, soldiers demolished one Palestinian home and sealed parts of two others after arresting residents suspected of attacks on Israeli soldiers or Arabs cooperating with Israel, the army said. The action against the Arab homes came Monday night, after two other Palestinian houses were demolished earlier in the day. The army statement announcing the sentencing of three Palestinians to prison said that all three were from the Jabalya camp but that house demolitions were not tied to their cases. The moves against Palestinian houses seem to be part of a stepped-up campaign to try to halt the Palestinian uprising against Israel's occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Israel also deported 13 Palestinians on Sunday. The International Committee of the Red Cross on Tuesday appealed to Israel to stop such deportations, saying they violated international law. In the West Bank, soldiers shot and wounded three Palestinians during clashes with stone-throwing youths in the towns of Ramallah and Tulkarem, Arab news reports said. One of the victims was an 8-year-old boy shot in the back, a hospital official said. The army said it was checking reports of injuries. Since the uprising began in December 1987, at least 345 Palestinians and 14 Israelis have died in violence. 
Surgeons tried to transplant a third liver Tuesday into a Maryland boy whose second operation was made possible by a mother of another young patient who volunteered the organ intended for her child. Jason Point, 5, of Deale, Md., went into surgery at 6 a.m., said Lynn McMahon, spokeswoman for Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh. The operation was expected to last 10 to 12 hours. Jason was in critical condition with an abscess in his liver going into Tuesday's surgery. In November, Jason received a liver originally intended for Candi Thomas, 6, of Accokeek, Md., after the girl's mother offered the organ to him. Candi's surgery was delayed because doctors said Jason would die within 48 hours without a transplant. Doctors ended up being able to reconstruct the girl's bile duct in surgery, ``so she didn't need another transplant,'' Ms. McMahon said. 
The government considers the issue of making the Solidarity trade union legal again a topic for discussion at proposed talks with the opposition, a government spokesman said Tuesday. ``Our standpoint is the following: let's sit down, as we have agreed, without preconditions let's talk about everything, therefore about Solidarity too, and let's try to come to agreement as far as the time, form and assumptions of setting union pluralism into motion,'' said spokesman Jerzy Urban. ``It would be a mistake to state that one does not want to consider the issue of Solidarity,'' he said in an opening statement at his weekly news conference. Solidarity leader Lech Walesa has refused to enter the talks _ first proposed during a wave of strikes in August _ until he receives a clear signal of official intention to make his union legal again. Asked about Urban's comments, Walesa reiterated his position in a telephone interview: ``I'm saying clearly and frankly: there is no freedom without Solidarity. The sooner all sides, including the authorities, realize it, ... the sooner we will make progress and solve the problems Poland faces.'' The government has said it is willing to talk about anything, but Urban appeared to be emphasizing more forcefully than before that the government wants talks on the opposition's chief demand _ the restoration of Solidarity. He said the government wants to discuss how to implement a long-suspended 1982 law that provided for trade union pluralism, and said he meant by that more than simply coexistence of branches of the official union movement OPZZ. Urban said Prime Minister Mieczyslaw F. Rakowski, at a Communist Party plenum last month, asked Central Committee members about their stance toward the ``aims of a portion of the people for a resumed, legal existence, in appropriate form, of a union under the name Solidarity.'' ``The party leader, Wojciech Jaruzelski, in summing up the first part of the plenum, left the issue open for reflection and consultation,'' Urban said. The plenum, which began Dec. 21-22, was broken into two parts. It will convene again in mid-January, with the Central Committee members instructed to give their answer to the questions posed by Rakowski about Solidarity. Urban referred to the present as a ``touchy moment'' and appealed to observers to ``show patience.'' He said there was ``vigorous discussion'' not only among authorities, but also among the opposition, and alleged that some former associates of Walesa believe he has betrayed Solidarity. ``I hope that illustrating the opinions and program of Lech Walesa's rivals will not be understood as an expression of our solidarity and political friendship with Mr. Walesa. Personally I would prefer to hang myself than be suspected of that,'' Urban said. 
The menu will include caviar, truffles and lobster sauteed in saffron sauce as President Reagan and his wife, Nancy, attend a fund-raiser Wednesday night for the Nancy Reagan Center for teen-age drug addicts. Hotel magnate Barron Hilton has pledged to raise $1 million for the center by throwing the lavish welcome-home party for the Reagans at the Beverly Hilton Hotel in Beverly Hills. The center, for those aged 12 to 18, is to be established in a former hospital in the San Fernando Valley. Organizers say they need $10 million to buy and renovate the structure. Television personality Merv Griffin will be master of ceremonies and singer Frank Sinatra and comedian Don Rickles will entertain at the dinner. To attend both the dinner and a reception, about 65 people are paying $25,000 for a table of 10. About 950 who will attend the dinner alone will pay $10,000 for a table of 10. The hotel said the black-tie gala would be the only welcome-home party for the Reagans before they relocate in Los Angeles after he leaves office Jan. 20. The president and first lady are vacationing at the Bel Air home where they will live. They will return to Washington Thursday. The main course for the dinner will be tournedos of veal. Appetizers will include shrimp, crabs, oysters, clams, smoked duck, steak tartare and smoked salmon and sturgeon as well as shrimp sauteed in garlic and the lobster tails in saffron sauce. The 125 waiters will serve a variety of California wines. 
Police searching for a man wanted in the fatal shooting of a fellow officer cheered when they found him already dead of a self-inflicted gunshot to the face. ``I might sleep tonight,'' Navajo County Sheriff Gary Butler said Monday afternoon, shortly after officers burst into a ranch cabin and found the body of one of two men sought in the Saturday night slaying of Deputy Bob Varner. The other man was arrested Monday. Varner, a 51-year-old Navajo County sheriff's deputy, died Monday at a Phoenix hospital from wounds he suffered when two men in a car he stopped on Interstate 40 opened fire. Officers surrounding the cabin cheered when the SWAT team radioed from the house that the man, tentatively identified as Douglas Savory, 45, was dead. ``The suspect is dead _ self-inflicted,'' said the voice on the radio. ``Mr. Savory was an extremely dangerous man,'' Butler said. ``Every time we had contact with him, he turned on us. He shot officer Varner before he even had a chance to react. He turned on two of our cars while we were trying to pursue him. Every time that we made contact with him, I ended up with several bullet holes in my patrol cars.'' Hundreds of officers from several law enforcement agencies took part in the search. The other man, identified as Raul Lopez, was arrested in Holbrook about 30 miles east of here, officials said. He was charged this morning with 10 felony counts of assault, burglary and other charges stemming from the shooting and the subsequent manhunt. Flagstaff Justice of the Peace James Sedillo visited Lopez in his hospital room at the Flagstaff Medical Center to file the charges. Lopez is being treated for frostbite. Rancher John Thompson, the cabin's owner, had called police early Monday morning when he discovered someone had broken in. The cabin is less than a quarter-mile from Interstate 40, and traffic was rerouted around a 33-mile stretch of the highway for at least six hours until the man's body was found. Authorities said a California warrant accused Savory of robbery and kidnapping in a gun store robbery last September in which five other people were arrested. No further information was immediately available on Lopez. 
Johnny Cash smoked a cigarette just 30 minutes before he had double heart bypass surgery, but he left the hospital Tuesday with a vow to give up smoking and other unhealthy habits. ``I'm 56 now and I never want to go through this again,'' the country singer said as he left Baptist Hospital with his wife, June Carter Cash, three weeks after his surgery. Cash will have his work cut out for him, according to his physician, Constantine Potanin, who said Cash should give up smoking, change his diet and exercise more. Cash underwent double bypass heart surgery Dec. 19, six days after doctors discovered that critical arteries around his heart were 90 percent blocked. The operation and subsequent convalescence was ``a great soul-searching experience,'' Cash said. His surgery took place one week after fellow country star Waylon Jennings had triple bypass surgery in the same hospital. 
Notre Dame's football team may have ended up No. 1 in the nation, but Coach Lou Holtz had to settle for No. 2. After winning the national championship Monday night by beating West Virginia, Holtz received a telephone call from the White House. At the time, Holtz was in the Notre Dame locker room speaking with the university's president, Rev. Edward A. Malloy. ``The president is on the phone,'' an assistant coach yelled to Holtz. ``I'm talking to the president,'' Holtz said. ``No,'' the aide said, ``it's the other president.'' Holtz took the call only to find out it wasn't President Reagan but Vice President-elect Dan Quayle. In any case, Holtz accepted an invitation to bring the team to the White House at an unspecified date. 
Danish television and newspapers paid tribute Tuesday to Victor Borge, the Danish-born pianist and comedian who marked his 80th birthday. Borge, a naturalized U.S. citizen who is still revered in his native land, was reported to be spending a quiet birthday at his vacation home in Christiansted, St. Croix, in the former Danish West Indies. With him were his wife, five children and eight grandchildren, as well as Niels-Joergen Kaiser, director of Copenhagen's Tivoli amusement park. Borge described Kaiser as his only friend ``because all the rest disappeared from age.'' The state television scheduled a 90-minute special on Borge in what was billed as an unusual glimpse of the entertainer off-stage. National radio in Sweden also broadcast a special program of one of Borge's performances. 
Eddie ``The Eagle'' Edwards, the British ski jumper who gained fame for bold jumps and bumpy landings at the Calgary Olympics, broke his collar bone Tuesday while training in Innsbruck. ``I have damaged myself,'' Edwards told organizers after he was helped out of the snow and sent to a hospital. The brash skier, who was training for a World Cup ski jumping event being held Wednesday, lost control of his right ski in midleap and tumbled several times on landing, the Austria Press Agency reported. In addition to the broken collar bone, he suffered a concussion, the report said. ``After I recover, I'll do that again,'' he was reported as saying. 
Retired Gen. William C. Westmoreland has been first many times in his career, but it took him about 30 years of golfing before recording his first hole in one. Westmoreland, 74, made the shot on Monday using a 6-iron on the 142-yard third hole at the Yeamans Hall Club in nearby Hanahan. It was witnessed by his wife and golfing partner, Kitsy Westmoreland. ``The laws of probability finally caught up with me,'' he said. ``I figured if I played long enough, I'd have to get one.'' Westmoreland, former commander of U.S. forces in Vietnam, gave credit to luck, not athletic prowess. ``It was not a very good shot,'' he said. ``Then, it suddenly disappeared. I was curious, still not believing it was a hole in one. But it turned out to be.'' 
Entertainer Cab Calloway, who underwent surgery last week for an undisclosed ailment, was listed in serious but stable condition Tuesday, an improvement from his previous critical condition. ``He wishes everyone a happy New Year and is resting comfortably,'' said Wendy Serkin, a spokeswoman for White Plains Hospital, where Calloway has been hospitalized since Wednesday. Calloway lives in White Plains. Calloway, who turned 81 on Christmas Day, became ill in Tokyo on Dec. 21. He flew back to this country Dec. 27 and underwent emergency surgery the following day. Hospital officials were not disclosing the nature of Calloway's ailment at the request of the family, said Serkin. Calloway is known as the ``King of Hi-de-ho,'' a refrain famous from the 1931 hit ``Minnie the Moocher,'' which he wrote with Irving Mills. 
Former Miss America Suzette Charles insists that she and heavyweight boxing champion Mike Tyson are just friends, despite reports linking them romantically. ``Mike and I are friends, but he's a married man,'' Ms. Charles told The Press of Atlantic City. ``I'm a fan of Mike's. I think he's a great fighter. I believe Mike is a very gentle, very kind person,'' she said from her dressing room at Elsinore's Atlantis Casino Hotel, where she is performing. ``But when it comes to (estranged wife) Robin Givens' allegations about him being physically abusive, well, we never know what goes on behind closed doors.'' 
In a merger of music industry giants, Tree International Publishing, the largest country music publisher in the world, has been sold to No. 1 CBS Records for a reported $45 million to $50 million. ``It offers us many, many opportunities simply because CBS has the ability to commit so much money,'' longtime Tree owner Buddy Killen said Tuesday. ``Nothing changes but the cash flow.'' He refused to disclose the pricetag on Monday's sale, but The Tennessean neswpaper of Nashville valued it at $45 million to $50 million. The deal is believed to be the largest financial transaction in the history of Nashville's Music Row. ``Tree belongs to Nashville, and I didn't want to let that change,'' Killen said. ``I wasn't going to settle until they agreed to all my prerequisites. That is, we had to stay in Nashville. We had to keep the name Tree International. We had to keep all our employees. And the headquarters had to be here.'' Killen, 52, will remain as president at the company and will become a CBS executive. Tree Vice President Donna Hilley will be chief operating officer. CBS Records President Tommy Mottola called the sale ``a marriage of two highly compatible partners.'' ``It's fitting that country music's leading publisher be united under the same roof with the leading record company in the world,'' he said. ``The purchase of Tree International is CBS Records' first acquisition since becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of Sony Corp.,'' Mottola said. ``It will provide us with a solid base upon which to build a significant music publishing entity.'' Tree has 40 exclusive songwriters and its own multistory office building. The company has ranked as Billboard Magazine's No. 1 country music publisher for 16 consecutive years. Its catalog of music copyrights includes more than 35,000 songs, including the standards of Willie Nelson, Buck Owens, Merle Haggard, Harlan Howard and Roger Miller. The deal marks the end of an era for the Nashville music business, which has seen locally controlled publishing companies sold off one by one to outside concerns. In the 1980s, such publishing companies as Acuff-Rose, Cedarwood, House of Gold and Combine Music went to out-of-town conglomerates. Tree was the last major publishing property that had not been acquired. CBS was purchased by Sony for a reported $2 billion in late 1987. But CBS's old song publishing division was purchased by SBK Entertainment World at that time. With the Tree purchase, Sony-CBS is re-entering the publishing field. CBS Records boasts such stars as Michael Jackson, Bruce Springsteen, George Michael, Barbra Streisand, Billy Joel, Terence Trent D'Arby, Willie Nelson, Sade, Chet Atkins, Pink Floyd and Rosanne Cash. 
Prime Minister Sadek Mahdi is stalling on reforms needed to mollify a populace fed up with a lingering civil war and a foundering economy, while Moslem fundamentalists in his coalition fight proposed changes. Sudanese and Western experts agree he needs to come up with solutions, and soon. Otherwise, they fear a return of street violence like that which gripped the country for four days last week. Many Sudanese believe Mahdi allowed the war and the economic problems to drag on too long, taking no decisive action until the course of events pushed him into it. What finally turned the streets into arenas of broken glass and burning barricades was Mahdi's imposition of steep price increases at a time when unrest already seethed over his refusal to endorse officially a draft peace agreement negotiated by a coalition partner. ``What we need is action,'' said Mohamed Omer Beshir, a veteran political observer and lecturer at Khartoum University's Institute of African and Asian Studies. ``We need any action to stop the war. ``Every day of the war makes the economic situation worse, and if things get worse, the people will not stay silent. They will react.'' But Beshir doesn't expect new demonstrations right away. ``The prime minister ... doesn't have the support of the people any more,'' Beshir said. ``But as for demonstrations again, not necessarily. Things in Sudan aren't always that logical.'' A Western diplomat, speaking on condition of anonymity, wasn't so sure. ``It's basically an explosive situation,'' he said. ``The reasons the people took to the streets last week still are there. While the situation might be dormant today, it could reignite any time.'' Last week's trouble followed smaller food riots late last year and severe and widespread criticism of Mahdi because he refused to endorse the peace agreement. It was signed Nov. 16 by the Democratic Unionist Party and Sudan People's Liberation Army and followed several failed efforts by Mahdi to come to terms with the rebels. Despite support for the agreement from across the Sudanese political spectrum except for the fundamentalist National Islamic Front, Mahdi stalled until too late to convene a constitutional peace conference Dec. 31, as the agreement required. The Democratic Unionists quit the coalition. Most observers in Sudan see Mahdi's refusal to act on the peace agreement was an attempt to satisfy the fundamentalist coalition partner at the expense of the centrist Democratic Unionists. The Islamic Front flatly rejected the pact because it would freeze the country's legal code, which is based on Islam's 1,350-year-old code of ethics and laws by which Moslems are supposed to live. ``El-Mahdi is like someone trying to ride two horses. No one knows how long he can keep this up,'' said Beshir. ``We need immediate action, but it doesn't look like el-Mahdi will provide it soon.'' As tensions built, the prime minister announced that salaries were being increased by up to 500 percent, then followed the news two days later with steep price increases on sugar and cigarettes and a 15 percent sales tax on locally manufactured commodities. ``If the people had been hopeful on peace, maybe the government would have gotten away with the price increases,'' the Western diplomat said. ``This way, they just made the people too angry to sit and take it any more.'' The street violence enticed the government to roll back the price increases and make the salary increases retroactive to July 1, and the disturbances slowly stopped. ``It was all very Sudanese to see how things all went back to normal on Saturday, with the usual terrible traffic and people at their desks,'' said the diplomat. ``It looked like all hell had broken loose on Thursday, and there was chaos.'' Indicative of restiveness in the army was that the generals refused to honor Mahdi's request that they intervene to help police put down the trouble. ``The military refused to get involved,'' said a Western military source. ``The price increases affected the military as well, and they didn't like it a bit.'' The foreign expert said the Sudanese military viewed the tentative agreement as ``a means to end the war, but Sadek didn't take it. The current government is the third reshuffle since Mahdi was elected in April 1986, after Mahdi brought in the National Islamic Front last year as a counter to his traditional enemy, the Democratic Unionists. 
Dalia Baligh is based in Cairo, Egypt, and makes frequent news-gathering trips to Sudan. 
Rival Shiite Moslem militias blasted each other with gunfire Tuesday as fighting intensified in the sector of Beirut where the 15 Western hostages are believed held, and in southern Lebanon. Police said nine people were killed and 19 wounded on the fourth straight day of clashes between the pro-Syrian Amal, Arabic for ``hope,'' and the Iranian-backed Hezbollah, or ``party of God.'' The latest deaths brought the casualty toll to 29 killed and 66 wounded since the violence began Saturday, said a police spokesman, who demanded anonymity. It was the heaviest fighting between the two militias since November. Amal and Hezbollah gunners lobbed mortar and gun shells at each other in south Beirut's Shiyah district as militiamen staged hit-and-run grenade attacks, the police spokesman said. Amal mounted a barrage of tank fire on Hezbollah strongholds in the Hajjaj neighborhood, but ``but our fighters turned back the attack,'' Hezbollah said. Hezbollah fighters wearing black headbands defended sandbagged positions in the Ghobeiri and Moawadd districts, which face Amal-controlled territory. Syrian peacekeeping troops in south Beirut appeared to be making no moves to stop the fighting. ``The Syrians ... only call on the combatants through loudspeakers to cease firing, but fighting starts again once the Syrian officers leave the area,'' said Abu Ali Jouma, a south Beirut resident who fled his apartment. Jouma said he was taking his wife and three children ``to stay with relatives in west Beirut until this is over.'' Syrian troops had ``taken adequate security precautions'' to prevent the fighting from spreading to west Beirut, according to a source at the Syrian military command, who spoke on condition of anonymity. The source said ``no military crackdown on either side is contemplated at the moment.'' It was the heaviest fighting since November between Amal and Hezbollah in their struggle to dominate Lebanon's 1 million Shiite Moslems, the country's largest sect. The street battles in November left 40 people dead and 87 wounded. The police spokesman said there was not way of knowing whether the fighting had affected the 15 Western hostages believed held by members of Hezbollah in the slums of south Beirut. The hostages include nine Americans, three Britons, an Irishman, an Italian and a Belgian. In an effort to end a three-week bloodbath in May between Amal and Hezbollah that left nearly 300 people dead and 1,000 wounded, the Syrians sent 4,500 troops to the slums that stretch across more than 16 square miles. Syria also has 7,500 troops in west Beirut and 25,000 soldiers in northern and eastern Lebanon under a 1976 Arab League mandate to halt the 14-year-old civil war between Lebanon's Christians and Moslems. The Syrian military presence does not include the villages in southern Lebanon. On Tuesday, Amal and Hezbollah gunners traded howitzer shells in five villages in southern Lebanon near the self-designated security zone Israel patrols just north of its border, a police spokesman said. Smoke billowed from houses hit by howitzers in Jbaa, Ein Bouswar, Jarjou, Arab Saleem and Louwaizeh, said a resident of the town of Nabatiyeh, reached by telephone from Beirut. Most civilians left the villages more than two years ago, after Hezbollah set up guerrilla bases there for launching attacks against Israeli troops in the security zone and against pro-Israeli militiamen in Lebanon. 
The Soviet bloc made concessions in human rights reforms and allowed better monitoring of compliance in the draft version of the Helsinki Conference's final accord presented to the members Tuesday. Western diplomats hailed the document as including landmark agreements, including greatly enhanced freedoms for Soviet bloc citizens to travel, emigrate, circulate and receive information, practice religion and reunite with relatives in the West. The document unexpectedly contained firm dates for a disputed human rights conference in Moscow, tentatively scheduled from Oct. 22 to Nov. 15, 1991. It includes one key U.S. and British requirement for agreeing to a Moscow conference _ a commitment by hosts of such meetings for free access to the forums. The draft, worked by nine neutral and non-aligned nations at the Vienna forum was introduced to a closed-door meeting of delegations Tuesday. Diplomatic sources afterward made a copy available to The Associated Press. U.S. Secretary of State George P. Shultz has recommended that President Reagan accept a Soviet proposal to hold the conference, a U.S. official said. If Reagan takes Shultz's advice, the stage also will be set for a new round of East-West negotiations to reduce conventional troops, tanks and artillery in Europe. The consensus of all 35 nations _ the United States, Canada, the Soviet Union and all European states bar Albania _ is required for final accord at the Vienna meeting, which opened in November 1986. The meeting's purpose is to review compliance with the 1975 Helsinki Accords on humanitarian issues, including human rights. Diplomats from both the Soviet bloc and the West said a first glance at the draft document indicated it could serve as the basis of a final agreement in time for foreign ministers of all states present to meet in Vienna Jan. 17-19, as suggested by Austria. Outstanding difficulties however include: _ East German objections to a requirement to phase out minimum currency exchange requirements for foreign visitors. East Germany earns millions of dollars in hard currency each year from visiting West Germans required to exchange such sums; _ Continuing difficulty over the precise zone within Turkey to be included in new talks on conventional security from the Atlantic to the Urals. Diplomats hope to resolve this this week. _ Last-minute insistence by Cyprus that a follow-up meeting on the peaceful settlement of disputes be held in Nicosia. This has drawn objections from Turkey. The Soviet Union and its allies are still not ready to guarantee completely free emigration or to dismiss the idea ``that it is legitimate to put people in prison for what they say or what they believe,'' U.S. ambassador to the conference Warren Zimmermann said in an interview last week. But the proposal of a Moscow human rights conference and Kremlin conduct at the Vienna forum have shown that ``the Soviet Union has elected to put human rights at the top of its own agenda,'' Zimmermann said. On Tuesday, Zimmermann declined to comment on the draft document until he has studied it thoroughly. The draft document provides for the solution of all outstanding emigration cases at the latest six months after the Vienna conference ends. It also says citizens who may be prevented from emigrating on grounds of national security _ a frequent reason given for refusing Soviet exit visas _ shall in the future be informed of the exact restrictions their work might place on foreign travel. The draft outlines plans for annual conferences on human rights in each year before the next Helsinki review conference, due in Helsinki in 1992. The human rights conferences will take place in Paris May 30-June 23, in Copenhagen June 5 to July 29, 1990 and in Moscow, according to the draft document. The final accord is to include a separate mandate worked out by the 16 NATO nations and seven Warsaw Pact countries for new 23-nation talks on reducing conventional forces and weapons in Europe. Those talks are to replace negotiations on Mutual and Balanced Force Reduction which have been going on in Vienna without agreement since 1973. 
The Ministry of Civil Affairs has become China's first government agency to hire employess on the basis of a civil service examination, an official report said Tuesday. The ministry has employes 30 of nearly 900 people who responded to a public notice announcing the exam, the China News Service said in a report that appeared in Hong Kong newspapers Tuesday. It did not say what the test contained. Most applicants were about 35 years old, had post-high school education and were working at small- to medium-sized enterprises, the report said. Communist Party chief Zhao Ziyang proposed a civil service system last year to make the government more efficient. The functions of party and government officials often overlap in China, where political connections frequently play a key role in obtaining jobs. Last month, the southern province of Guangdong held the country's first large-scale civil service exam, in which 120,000 applicants participated. 
Police have arrested nine people and detained five others for heroin trafficking, an official report said Tuesday. About 160 people, including state employees, were implicated in a drug operation in Baoji City, in northern Shaanxi province, the China Daily said. It said authorities seized about 15 pounds of heroin worth more than $189,000 and located 12 locations for processing the drug, the report said. It said the heroin came from Gansu province, about 180 miles west of Baoji. Smugglers reportedly use southern China routes to transport heroin from Burma, Laos and Thailand to Hong Kong, but reported cases of heroin use in China are rare. The report did not say whether the heroin was sold to Chinese or was destined for the international market. 
Two barges carrying oil caught fire and exploded on the Yangtze River, killing one firefighter and leaving seven other people missing, official news reports said. The Xinhua News Agency said the fire on one of the barges had been extinguished as of Tuesday afternoon but the other was still burning. The fires broke out Monday about 50 miles upstream from Wuhan, capital of Hubei province, blocking all traffic on China's longest waterway, it said. The fires on the barges, part of a fleet belonging to the Nanking-Yangtze Oil Shipping Co., started simultaneously, Xinhua reported. One firefighter was killed and eight others were injured while fighting the fires, and seven other people were still missing, it said. It was not immediately clear whether the missing people were firefighters. The fire spread across the width of the oil-slicked river where the two explosions took place, halting river traffic for several hours, the news agency said. The fire, one of the most serious ever on the waterway, caused damages estimated at $2.7 million, it said. The cause was still under investigation, Xinhua said. 
President-elect Bush swore in new senators in one of his last official duties as presiding officer of the Senate on Tuesday, then renewed ``loud and clear'' a campaign pledge against new taxes. The vice president gave the oath of office to 32 senators elected last fall and to one appointed senator, Dan Coats, R-Ind., who was named to replace Vice president-elect Dan Quayle. Speaking with reporters after a picture-taking session, Bush said he intended to work with Congress ``to solve the defcit'' but would hold fast to his oft-repeated campaign pledge against supporting a tax increase. ``It's funny, I've talked to about 33 new senators and not one of them has said that to me,'' Bush said when asked if a possible tax increase had been discussed. He said of his campaign pledge, ``The American people have heard it loud and clear.'' Despite Bush's comments, many Democrats and some Republicans believe he will have to change his mind to win agreement on a comprehensive plan to reduce the federal budget deficit. Bush's appearance at the largely ceremonial first Senate session of the new Congress was has next-to-last expected official duty as the Senate's constitutional presiding officer. He was to preside again on Wednesday in a joint session of Congress called to formally count the electoral votes that delivered Bush the presidency in last November's election. After swearing in members in groups of four in the Senate chamber, Bush recreated the scene individually for most of the newly elected and re-elected senators in the ornate Old Senate Chamber down the hall from the present one. He posed with senators and their families and joked with reporters and photographers, at one pont ``swearing in'' in jest a group of photographers. ``I'm going to make a little news up here for you guys,'' Bush joked. However, when asked about whether he planned to resist a subpoena to testify in the trial of former White House aide Oliver North, Bush retorted: ``I don't want to make that much news.'' Bush also met privately with Rep. Phil Crane, R-Ill. John Sununu, Bush's incoming chief of staff, said the session was to discuss ``a few loose ends'' and was set up at Crane's request. Bob Foster, a Crane aide, said that the congressman had ``requested the meeting to talk about legislation,'' including trade measures. Crane is the senior Republican on the House Ways and Means trade subcommittee. ``They knew each other when Bush served in Congress and he (Crane) just wanted to see him since he was up here. It won't be that easy to see him (Bush) once he becomes president,'' Sununu said. The vice president still has one Cabinet post to fill, that of energy secretary, and he has not yet filled the ``drug czar'' position created by Congress last year. Bush aides said they expected announcements on these posts ater this week. 
A U.N. agency has suspended aid to a refugee camp run by the Khmer Rouge after a fire at a medical clinic prompted security concerns, an aid official said Tuesday. Security personnel informed the U.N. Border Relief Operation that the clinic at the O'Trao camp, controlled by the Cambodian guerrillas, was damaged by a Dec. 24 fire, the official said. After the blaze, the U.N. agency and private volunteer groups under its protection stopped supplies and visits to the camp, said the aid official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. The clinic was run by Thailand's Catholic Office For Emergency Relief and Refugees. ``The Thai authorities asked us not to go there for security reasons,'' the official said. O'Trao, in northeastern Sisaket province near the Cambodian border, houses about 17,000 refugees. It is one of four U.N.-aided refugee camps controlled by the communist Khmer Rouge, who have been charged with widespread human rights violations against refugees. The Khmer Rouge is the largest of three guerrilla groups fighting the Vietnamese-backed Cambodian government. The official said the cause of the blaze at the clinic was not known. He said it might have been set by radical Khmer Rouge guerrillas unhappy that increasing numbers of refugees have had access to the Western-influenced clinic. The official said that a few days before the fire, a Cambodian medic had been shot and seriously wounded at the O'Trao clinic. The Khmer Rouge recently have moved at least 5,000 refugees out of O'Trao. Aid officials said the guerrillas apparently planned to use the refugees to populate areas of Cambodia from which Vietnamese troops have withdrawn. The Vietnamese and Cambodian government forces have staged border attacks to stop the resettlement, diplomatic sources said. On Jan. 1, a shell crashed into a house at the U.N.-assisted Site 8 refugee camp, killing a woman and her child and seriously injuring her husband, officials said. Another woman suffered head cuts. Site 8, the largest camp run by the Khmer rouge, houses about 35,000 refugees from the Cambodian civil war and is near the border. 
Deadline Approaching to Apply 
Farmers who do not have an approved conservation plan for highly erodible land have less than a year in which to comply, the Agriculture Department said Tuesday. The plans, subject to USDA approval, are blueprints for managing and reducing erosion of highly susceptible land. Wilson Scaling, chief of the department's Soil Conservation Service, said farmers must have their conservation plans approved by the end of 1989 to remain eligible for USDA program benefits. Most farmers who still need a conservation plan will receive written notice from local agency offices within the next few weeks, he said. About 65 percent of the nation's farmers who participate in USDA crop programs already have obtained approval for their conservation plans, Scaling said. But an estimated 800,000 have not yet done so. ``We know some farmers are holding off because they are afraid the rules for erosion reduction were too rigid,'' Scaling said. ``That's a misconception. The final rule provides for flexibility in reaching acceptable erosion reductions base on local conditions and standards in field office technical guides.'' Farmers who have highly erodible land and fail to develop acceptable plans stand to lose USDA farm program benefits, including price and income supports, crop insurance, Farmers Home Administration loans, Commodity Credit Corp. storage payments, Conservation Reserve Program annual payments and other benefits. Scaling said farmers who do not have plans approved by Dec. 31, 1989, will forfeit benefits on all the land they farm, not just on the highly erodible acres. 
A government licensing panel said Tuesday it refused to believe teachers would abandon pupils in an emergency and had conditionally approved evacuation plans for 17 New Hampshire towns around the Seabrook nuclear power plant. The $5.6 billion plant was completed two years ago and operation has been held up in disputes over the adequacy of the evacuation plan. A three-member panel of the commission's Atomic Safety and Licensing Board said, in a 290-page decision dated Friday and released Tuesday, it found ``reasonable assurance that adequate protective measures can and will be taken within the New Hampshire portion'' of the evacuation zone. Four conditions were attached to the approval. Three seemed technical: state submission to the Federal Emergency Management Agency of satisfactory personnel rosters for workers at emergency reception centers, extended hours at one center if necessary for decontamination of workers arriving from the other three centers after those centers close, and confirmation that promised plan revisions had in fact been made. The fourth requires resolution of an omission in forecasts of road traffic in an emergency: traffic of people going from jobs in the evacuation zone to nearby homes. Tuesday's decision was hailed by backers of the plant. Opponents said they would appeal. ``This is very good news,'' said Ron Sher, spokesman for the plant. ``We were quite certain the plans would be approved,'' said Richard Strome, head of the state's Emergency Management Agency. On the other side, Jane Doughty, spokeswoman for the Seacoast Anti-Pollution League, said, ``They have no basis to ignore that sworn testimony'' that teachers would leave. She added: ``It's human nature to take care of your family first.'' Six Massachusetts towns lie in the Seabrook zone, but that state has refused to participate in the planning on the grounds that it would be impossible to move crowds off the beaches near the plant in an emergency. The plant lead owner, Public Service Co. of New Hampshire, has submitted a plan for Massachusetts for which the board still has to schedule public hearings. On Nov. 18, President Reagan gave FEMA authority to draw up such plans and carry them out if a state refuses the job. In hearings last summer, the board heard testimony from 13 teachers working in the evacuation zone that ``the teachers would promptly leave the schools and their pupils in order to care for their own children and other dependents,'' and they believed other teachers would do so, too. There was similar testimony from some officials of the five New Hampshire towns that have refused to take part in planning. ``We must recognize that these claims were made with the knowledge that Seabrook has yet to be licensed, and that its licensing may still be prevented,'' the decision said. The panel said 597 teachers working in the zone signed a petition stating they ``do not accept the conflict of duty which the emergency response plan assigns us.'' ``The concept of abandoning their children was not expressed to them when their signatures were gathered,'' the decision said. ``The board does not accept the implied conclusion of the teachers' testimony that virtually all of the teachers in the (zone) will abruptly abandon their pupils without even pausing to account for them and seeing them to a school bus,'' it said. ``We would expect teachers to perform better than the general population in an emergency.'' The board said it relied heavily on expert testimony that trained workers with well-defined emergency roles do not generally leave their jobs, and on testimony by Dennis S. Miletti, professor of sociology at Colorado State University, that experience in hurricanes and other disasters shows that crises ``elicit altruistic public behavior'' in which a ``therapeutic community'' is formed. 
Bomb threats against airlines in the wake of the Flight 103 disaster prompted four unscheduled landings, delayed three departures and kept security tight in Asia and Europe on Tuesday. The head of the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration, T. Allen McArtor, told U.S. airline representatives in London to have ``a heightened level of security on all American flights operating out of European and Middle Eastern airports.'' A bomb destroyed Pan Am Flight 103 on Dec. 21, sending the Boeing 747 crashing into the Scottish village of Lockerbie, killing all 259 aboard and 11 on the ground. Two Air-India planes made unscheduled landings at airports in Indonesia and Malaysia on Tuesday after receiving warnings that bombs were on board, but no bombs were found in either plane, the officials said. An Air-India Boeing 747, flying from Sydney, Australia, to Singapore with 281 people aboard, landed at Ngurah Ray International Airport in Bali, Indonesia, Tuesday afternoon. Authorities received a warning that an explosive device had been planted on board, said Widiana, a security officer at the airport. The Boeing 747's final destination was Bombay, India. Earlier Tuesday, an Air-India Airbus carrying 137 passengers on a flight to Madras, India, returned to Subang International Airport in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, after a bomb warning also turned out to be a hoax, officials said. Many Asian airlines have tightened security precautions after a warning that terrorists plan to hijack or blow up a commercial airliner in the region this month. An Alitalia DC-9 was on a flight from Paris to Venice late Monday when Munich air controllers told the pilot of an anonymous bomb threat. The pilot decided to land at Zurich's Kloten airport, where the plane was searched before resuming its trip Tuesday. A Tunis Air Boeing 737 was on a flight from Geneva to Tunis late Monday when it was forced to land in Milan, Italy, because of a bomb threat. The plane was searched and took off on Tuesday. An anonymous caller to a Pan Am booking agent Tuesday delayed a flight from New York to Buenos Aires for two hours Tuesday during a stopover in Rio de Janeiro, said the privately owned Jornal do Brasil radio. The caller reportedly telephoned the airline and said a bomb was aboard. Airport police took all passengers off the plane, which was searched. Nothing was found and the plane was allowed to continue on to Buenos Aires, the radio said. Another anonymous threat forced 30 passengers of an Istanbul-bound Pan Am Boeing 727 off the plane while the plane was searched. They spent Monday night at Geneva hotels before continuing Tuesday morning. About 170 British children returning from a Swiss holiday were evacuated from a 727 of the British charter airline Dan Air on Monday. Geneva police received a telephone call from a man who said security forces had 15 minutes to empty the plane. Police said the caller identified himself as a member of the Irish Republican Army. A search turned up nothing. ``In most cases, such calls prove to be a hoax,'' said Peter Gutknecht. spokesman at Kloten airport. ``But we have to take every threat seriously. Unfortunately, publicizing them will encourage pranksters.'' Gutknecht said security measures at Swiss airports ``continue to be very stringent and can hardly be improved.'' Scandinavian Airlines System, alarmed by a bomb threat reportedly from an Iranian Shiite Moslem group, maintained the highest alert in its history Tuesday, causing flight delays for the third day. 
For freshman Rep. Ronald K. Machtley, who made a national splash in November as the only challenger to defeat a House chairman, it didn't take long on his first day in Congress Tuesday to savor the perks of office. ``Look, there's Cooter,'' he told his family during their walk to the swearing-in ceremony in the Capitol when he spied a fellow newcomer, Rep. Ben Jones, a Georgia Democrat best known for his portrayal on television's ``The Dukes of Hazzard'' of the good ole boy Cooter. ``I've met him. He's a nice guy.'' It's like that in Washington for members of Congress, who are big fish at home but in the capital are just one of 535 lawmakers, most of whom have little notoriety. Machtley, R-R.I., is unlikely to immediately acquire the clout of the man he defeated two months ago, 14-term veteran Democratic Rep. Fernand J. St Germain, the chairman of the House Banking Committee. For now, he's starting at the bottom, a member of the minority party in the House and with no seniority, either. His surprising victory over St Germain, by a 56-44 percent margin, came in his first try for public office, and made him one of just six challengers to defeat an incumbent. Machtley is one of just 33 freshmen in the 435-member House. ``I accept that I won't go down there and turn Congress upside-down legislatively,'' the 40-year-old lawyer said last week from his office in Newport, R.I. ``But I have the educational background so that I'll do a good job.'' Machtley, a Naval Academy graduate who went on to become an attorney, defeated St Germain after a campaign in which he took popular positions in the overwhelmingly Democratic district, such as favoring a woman's right to abortion and reduced spending on President Reagan's ``Star Wars'' missile defense proposal. He was also boosted by his rival's ethics problems, which centered on accusations that St Germain had accepted favors from lobbyists. The Justice Department and House Ethics Committee have studied those allegations but never moved against St Germain. ``I've tried to be realistic,'' he says. ``I've said I'd go down and try to put people first and my own wealth second, and that I'd do the best I can.'' His work began Tuesday, a day that featured much pomp and circumstance but little of substance. He and his wife Kati, who for now are staying with their two children at a local hotel, began their day working out in an exercise room at 8 a.m. He was in his Longworth House Office Building suite across the street from the Capitol an hour later. Like most freshmen, he faces an early-session case of chaos, since he has almost no office equipment, a bare desk and empty bookshelves, and still gets lost a lot. ``I'm learning my way around,'' he said. A few family members gathered in his office, and his wife, children, parents and mother-in-law accompanied him to the Capitol to watch a two-hour session of the House that culminated in members taking the oath of office. ``It's a real big deal,'' concluded his 12-year-old daughter, Erin. Then it was back to his Longworth office, where a small group of lobbyists, staff and other lawmakers dined on cold cuts, soda, beer and wine, and mingled with relatives who told of the days Machtley, while in the Naval Academy, earned spare change by diving for balls in golf course ponds, polishing them up and selling them. ``I was the one who had to clean them,'' said his younger sister, Susan Carl. Above the din of the reception, Machtley juggled interviews with Rhode Island reporters and posed for photographs with his family. It was all interrupted by a strange series of loud buzzes, a well-known sound to the ears of Capitol Hill veterans. ``What is that?'' he asked his aides. It turned out to be the signal used to summon members to the House floor for a vote. 
Gov. Michael S. Dukakis announced today he would not seek re-election in 1990, but added, without elaboration, that he aimed to continue working in public service. ``This will be my last term as governor of Massachusetts,'' he told a crowded news conference. Though he lost the presidential race two months ago, Dukakis said that loss had little impact on his decision. Even if he had not run for president, he said, he probably would have not sought an unprecedented fourth four-year term. He gave no immediate indication of his long-term plans, including whether he would seek the presidency again in 1992 or seek any other elective office. Asked for a hint to his future, Dukakis would say only, ``Public policy and public service is what I'm all about, it's what I love.'' He said he intended to spend the last two years of his term fulfilling his responsibilities, wrapping up his programs and working to make certain he was succeeded by a Democrat. He said he would announce his legislative agenda later this week. He did not endorse anyone as his successor. Dukakis said he would miss the governorship, but had no regrets, ``It's one of those moments. ... There's a certain sadness. I've loved this job,'' he said. Dukakis' announcement comes at a time when Massachusetts is facing a fiscal squeeze. He has acknowledged a shortfall of at least $600 million for the current fiscal year in the state budget, which totals $11.6 billion. He has ordered spending cuts but has not said whether he will seek new taxes. In recent weeks, Dukakis had been urged by fellow Democrats to announce his plans so they could begin making their political plans for the governorship. ``One has to make a decision; I've made that decision,'' he said. ``It seemed to me desirable to make the decision now, rather than later,'' he added. At age 55, Dukakis is midway through his third four-year term as governor of Massachusetts. He has already served longer as the state's governor than any of his predecessors. He was first elected to the Massachusetts governorship in 1974, then lost the Democratic primary when he sought re-election four years later. But he won back the post in 1982 and was re-elected in a landslide in 1986. During the second week of December, Dukakis took a week-long vacation, his first since the presidential election, in Florida. Before leaving, Dukakis said he planned to spend some of his vacation time reflecting on the campaign against Republican George Bush and on his own plans for the future. In the past few weeks, speculation has mounted about Dukakis and his plans, with some saying he would seek a rematch with Bush in 1992, or would run for governor again, or would drop out of politics for some sort of academic position. In a recent poll, Dukakis appeared to enjoy a commanding lead in popularity statewide compared with such likely Democratic challengers as Boston Mayor Raymond Flynn. The survey, taken by Dukakis' political operation, said he would defeat Flynn to a margin of 67 percent to 27 percent if the gubernatorial election were now. In his interview two weeks ago, Dukakis said he wanted to make the next two years ``the best two years the state has ever had.'' But he gave no hint of how that goal might relate to his political plans. 
The timing was right, just after Christmas and about the date that income tax forms arrive. But everything else was phony about the $1 million checks sent to a dozen people nationwide, say Postal Service officials. They regard the hoax as such a bad joke that they don't plan to pursue it. According to bank and postal authorities, someone in the Phoenix area found a packet of checks from a discontinued account, wrote the checks and marked them ``sweepstakes winners'' in imitation of a television commercial, then used envelopes bearing the return address of various companies to mail them. Officials of First Interstate Bank told one victim of the hoax that about a dozen people had called about the checks. Officials declined to release the recipients' names. The checks were signed ``Percy Eubanks Jr.'' Percy Eubanks Sr. said his son, who once worked for a fast-food restaurant here, had closed the First Interstate account months ago. The phone number listed on the checks for the younger Eubanks has been reassigned to Virginia Hughes, who said she had received four or five calls. Ms. Hughes said one of her call came from Bonnie Benson of Barnesville, Ohio, who said she called the bank as well. ``You don't sneeze at a million dollars. You never know,'' Ms. Benson said. She said she believes the prankster got her name and address from an advertisement she ran in a national club's newsletter. Bonnie Baker, an employee of The Arizona Republic, tipped reporters from her newspaper after receiving a check herself. She said she got hers in a subscription-payment envelope for Phoenix Newspapers Inc. ``I would like to go and deposit it. You know it's not true, but deep down you hope it is, kind of like the old `Millionaire' TV series,'' Ms. Baker said. The perpetrator of the joke mailed the envelopes using magazine-selection stamps rather than U.S. postage stamps, the women said. However, the stamps were canceled, and the envelopes were delivered. The U.S. Postal Inspector's Office and Phoenix police said they didn't plan to pursue the case because it was so obviously a hoax that they would have difficulty proving criminal intent. 
The top State Department official for Latin American policy said in a farewell interview released Tuesday that the Reagan administration made a mistake in mouse and Senate on Tuesday, but President-elect Bush administered at least one oath that wasn't on the schedule. Bush, soon to be the nation's 41st president, turned to the photographers surrounding him in the Old Senate Chamber and asked them raise their right hands and to swear an oath _ an oath of good conduct during his administration. The moment came in a banter-filled pause during the ceremonial reenactment of the oath of office for senators. At one point, Bush turned to reporters and announced: ``I'm going to make a little news up here for you guys.'' He was then asked if he planned to contest his subpoena to testify at the Iran-Contra trial of former White House aide Oliver L. North. ``I'm not going to make that much news,'' Bush replied. Although most senators eagerly strode down the Senate aisle to take the oath to ``preserve and protect the Constitution of the United States against all enemies foreign and domestic,'' there was one prominent absentee. Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass., postponed taking the oath so he could be in Providence, R.I., to watch his son, Patrick, take his own oath of office as a member of the Rhode Island Legislature. ``That's something that as a proud father he could not miss,'' said Melody Miller, a Kennedy staff member. In both House and Senate there was much talk of bipartisan cooperation with the incoming Bush administration. Dozens of senators walked up to Bush who was seated in the presiding officer's chair in the Senate to shake his hand and wish him well. ``Because President-elect Bush has served in this House, I am encouraged that he will exhibit appreciation for the constitutional responsibilities of the Congress and will seek avenues of cooperation,'' said House Speaker Jim Wright of Texas. Wright was re-elected speaker, 253 to 170 in the Democratic-controlled House, and his vanquished opponent, House Minority Leader Bob Michel of Illinois, announced achievement of a record. Michel said he is ``the first man in our history to suffer the indignity of losing this contest for speaker five times in a row.'' He also had a wish list. ``We should ban proxy voting, reduce the numbers of subcommittees, cut staff, cut spending, halt abuses of franked (free) mail, stop campaigning at taxpayers' expense and, most importantly, blow the doors off this chamber and let in the clean, fresh air of open debate.'' Scores of members' small children dressed in their starched-and-pressed finest were on hand as the House opened its session precisely at noon. But soon some were squirming in their parents' laps or crawling over the seat backs and along the floor. Rep. Robert Dornan, R-Calif., placed a toddler on the Republican committee table. The child walked along its length, holding onto the congressman's lapels for support. Outside the chamber members stood in long lines to pick up their electronic voting cards and the lapel pins that identify them as members of Congress, authorized to enter the Capitol without walking through metal detectors. One freshman congressman, Rep. Glenn Poshard, D-Ill., was seen, still wearing a charcoal gray topcoat, standing in a sixth-floor corridor of the Longworth House Office Building. He was looking at directional signs and muttering to himself. ``Sixteeen-oh-five, 1605,'' Poshard said. ``It's got to be around here somewhere. Which way?'' A reporter escorted the new congressman to his new office. In the Senate, children and other senatorial relatives and friends were confined to the galleries, filling every seat. Lady Bird Johnson, sitting near her daughter Lynda, watched son-in-law Charles Robb take the oath of office as a U.S. senator from Virginia. The ceremony occurred on the 40th anniversary of the day her husband, the late President Lyndon B. Johnson, first took his oath as a U.S. senator. The Senate chamber was resplendent. Since the 100th Congress adjourned in October a patterned, dark-blue carpet had been laid down, the presiding officer's chair framed with a backdop of gold curtains bordered with blue and red, and the staff benches in the corners of the chamber upholstered in brilliant scarlet. ``It's obviously all been done for television,'' Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich., told a group of constituents. The convening of the Bicentennial 101st Congress _ 200 years after the first Congress got things going in 1789 _ marked a changing of the guard in the Senate. Sen. George Mitchell, D-Maine, is taking over as majority leader from Sen. Robert C. Byrd, D-W.Va. Byrd, about to become chairman of the Appropriations Committee, said the burdens of leadership had been lifted. ``The bags under my eyes are gone,'' he said. ``I'm enjoying the quality of life.'' Mitchell said he is challenged by his new responsibilities. ``I'm not only learning something new every day; I'm learning something new every 10 or 15 minurtes,'' he said. One new senator, Republican Conrad Burns of Montana, came to Washington from his only other public office: Commissioner of Yellowstone County. What are the differences between the two jobs? ``Bigger zeroes,'' Burns replied.'' 
Five cents won't get you a cup of coffee at Wilson Cain's coffee shop anymore, but patrons of the Southside Pharmacy Coffee Shoppe have been over-tipping for 25 years anyway, Cain says. Cain raised the price of his coffee to 50 cents a cup on Monday. ``I have given you coffee for 25 years at five cents a cup. Due to inflation, it's time to start paying for coffee. The new 25-year price will be 50 cents,'' Cain told customers in a sign posted behind the cash register. ``I swore I'd never do it,'' said Cain, who's also a city councilman. ``It's the clientele I've got that looks at me and says `Hey, your coffee is too cheap.' They forced me. Most of them would leave a tip that was greater than the cost of the coffee.'' Customer Rebecca Looney agreed that the price hike was justified. ``It's just paying for all the cups I drank before,'' she said. 
A fierce legal battle is shaping up in El Paso County's courthouse _ not between litigants, but between two district judges who covet the same courtroom. One judge got so steamed up Monday that he threatened to hold court under a tree to make his point _ and this desert city is not known for an abundance of trees. The gavel started to fall Friday, when newly elected District Judge Jose Troche went home thinking his papers, books and other property were stowed safely in the sixth-floor office of his predecessor, Ward Koehler. One of Koehler's last acts as district judge was to decree that Troche would get his old office and courtroom. The one-page order was posted on the office door Friday. But Monday morning, Troche got a rude surprise _ in place of Koehler's order was the nameplate of Koehler's former political rival, Judge Peter Peca Jr. Some of Troche's files and papers had been stacked on a table in a jury room down the hall; others were stashed in Peca's former second-floor office, and even in a trash can. Troche and Koehler were outraged. ``Judge Peca has resorted to some awfully highhanded tactics to try to take over the courtroom,'' said Koehler. Peca, on the other hand, considers the courtroom his due. El Paso has 11 district judges and 10 courtrooms. For the past two years, Peca had been like a loser at a game of musical chairs, banging his gavel in whichever courtroom happened to be free. Now, he said, he has seniority. ``Troche is a new judge,'' he said. ``He can take his turn without a courtroom.'' Troche has asked county commissioners to intervene in his behalf. In the meantime, he's scheduled a plea in the disputed courtroom. ``We're going to take the plea,'' he said. ``Even if we have to do it under a tree someplace, we're going to do it.'' 
Attorneys for Bess Myerson's boyfriend Carl ``Andy'' Capasso asked a federal judge Tuesday to recommend that he be moved to a halfway house to help him earn money and deal with family problems. Capasso, 43, a millionaire contractor, has been in a Lewisburg, Pa., prison since pleading guilty to federal tax evasion charges in January 1988. He was acquitted Dec. 22 along with Ms. Myerson, 64, a former Miss America who was the city's cultural affairs commissioner, of an alleged divorce-fixing scheme. Defense attorney Jay Goldberg asked U.S. District Judge Charles E. Stewart to recommend to the Bureau of Prisons that Capasso be moved to a minimum security facility in midtown Manhattan which provides a transition for prisoners re-entering society. Capasso is scheduled to be released from prison June 26. ``There is a family crisis involving the children,'' said Goldberg. Capasso has two children, 16 and 14, and three grown stepchildren. Goldberg told the judge that the 16-year-old, particularly, suffered because of the latest trial. Capasso also needs to earn money to pay a $500,000 fine, Goldberg said. ``We're dealing with a nonviolent offender who erred with respect to his income tax,'' the lawyer said. The judge said he would consider the request. The government is opposed to any action by the judge, said David Lawrence, deputy chief of the U.S. attorney's criminal division. ``We think it's inappropriate,'' he said of the request. ``We think it's for the Bureau of Prisons to decide (without a judge's recommendation) where Mr. Capasso should spend the remainder of his six months. The family situation, the business situation, has been raised time and time again before the court,'' he said. 
A plan by the American Medical Association to develop treatment guidelines for doctors may lead to ``cookbook medicine,'' one critic said Tuesday, but supporters contended medical care could improve. ``What this plan may do is encourage doctors to learn more about what works and what doesn't work and do it in a more structured way,'' said Harold Luft, a professor of health economics at the University of California at San Francisco and a supporter of the plan. But critics said the guidelines could hamper doctors in their treatment of patients. ``The standards will either be inordinately vague to the point of being unacceptable (or) if they are strict the AMA is likely to disown them,'' said Dr. Sidney Wolfe, director of the Public Citizens Health Research Group in Washington, D.C. Under the AMA plan, announced last month, clinical experts in medical specialties will issue guidelines on appropriate treatments for various problems, said Dr. John Kelly, director of the Chicago-based organization's newly created office of quality assurance. Research on patient health will be used to develop the recommendations, said Kelly, a California emergency-care physician. The first guidelines, to be issued by the end of 1989, probably will deal with areas in which the preferred treatment is still unclear, Kelly said. A condition such as clogged coronary arteries, for example, has several rival therapies. The goal is to provide doctors with better information on treatment choices, he said. ``What we believe is if the guidelines are credible, physicians will follow them. If a physician chooses to practice outside of what the guidelines are, he may have to document why he does it,'' Kelly said. ``The question is, are they going to be precise guidelines or are they going to be `anything goes'?'' asked Wolfe. ``This may lead to cookbook medicine,'' he added. ``It amounts to writing out recipes to tell doctors how to treat their patients. A lot of doctors are going to come out on the wrong side of this recipe or cookbook and they're not going to like it.'' Luft defended the plan. ``In general, it will probably improve the practice of medicine if it's done with sensitivity,'' he said. ``One needs to be concerned, however, that guidelines are not set in concrete and are not so broad as to be meaningless.'' Luft said the AMA's involvement was ``encouraging. I would worry much more about cookbook medicine if it (guidelines) was coming from insurers and the government.'' Doctors have been under great pressure from insurance companies, patients and government agencies to set treatment guidelines, said Dennis O'Leary, president of the Joint Commission for the Accreditation of Healthcare Organzations in Chicago. ``If physicians don't do this themselves, governments or payers (insurance companies) will do it for them,'' he said. ``The AMA is the right organization to do this.'' The AMA is the nation's largest organization of physicians with more than 280,000 members, said Dr. James Todd, the group's deputy executive vice president. Luft said the guidelines may also help physicians defend themselves against malpractice lawsuits. ``A doctor will be able to say `Look. I followed the guidelines set down by the AMA. I didn't do anything wrong,''' he said. 
The Democratic-controlled 101st Congress staged opening ceremonies on Tuesday filled with pomp and pageantry and spiced by controversy over a recommendation for a large pay raise for lawmakers. On a day given over largely to swearing-in ceremonies and receptions, Democrats pledged cooperation with theadministration. Leaders of both parties laughed off a question about higher taxes. President-elect Bush ad incoming Bush ministered the oath of office to new and newly re-elected senators in groups of four. A few hundred feet across the Capitol, Speaker Jim Wright swore in House members. Wright, D-Texas, in a speech marking his election to a second term as speaker, vowed to use the next two years to attack ``the budget deficit, the trade deficit and the social deficit caused by the widening gap between rich and poor.'' He offered Bush ``unstinting cooperation'' toward a bipartisan foreign policy, but his rhetoric on other matters was more restrained. Without mentioning taxes, he prodded Bush to submit budget plans within six weeks if possible, and said Democrats were eager to help the new president improve education, child careesident Reagan notifying him that Congress was in session. This they did, and when asked by reporters about the possibility of higher taxes, the lawmakers laughed in unison. Bush has said he will fight any proposal to reduce the deficit through new taxes, but many Democrats and some Republicans believe he will have to change his mind to win agreement on a comprehensive deficit-fighting plan. Opening day was a combination of the carefully scripted and the unexpected. Freshman Rep. Glenn Poshard, D-Ill., arriving for his first day on the job, stood perplexed in the hallway of a House office building. ``Sixteeen-oh-five, 1605. It's got to be around here somewhere. Which way?'' he muttered aloud. A reporter escorted him to his new office. Events went more smoothly on the Senate and House floors, followed by a seemingly endless series of lunches and parties to celebrate victories won last November. The Senate bore a new blue patterned carpet for the occasion, as well as new scarlet benches in the corners for staff aides to view the proceedings. The galleries were packed with spectators as Bush swore in 32 elected senators and Dan Coats, R-Ind., appointed to replace Vice President-elect Dan Quayle. Quayle mingled with his former colleagues on the Senate floor. Incoming White House Chief of Staff John Sununu also attended. The pomp was nowhere better on display than in the Senate, where outgoing majority leader Robert C. Byrd off West Virginia was named president pro tempore, the post that goes to the longest-serving senator of the majority party. First a resolution was passed appointing Byrd. Then, as he took the presiding officer's chair, a resolution was approved notifying the House of his appointment. Finally, a resolution was approved congratulating him for attaining his new position. The atmosphere was less staid in the House, where many lawmakers were accompanied to the opening-day session by spouses or young children. Republicans waged a symbolic battle to rewrite House rules to their liking, but majority Democrats brushed them aside. Republican leader Bob Michel said his troops would make their views known in a ``clear and forceful manner'' all year. If no one wanted to talk about taxes, Rep. Tom Tauke, R-Iowa, was eager to begin a debate over Reagan's expected recommendation for a hefty pay raise for members of the House and Senate. ``Congressional pay adjustments have become a perpetual source of debate, controversy and embarrassment,'' he said, in calling for a two-year delay in any increase and requiring a roll call vote in both houses before salary hikes take effect. Reagan is expected to call for a substantial pay raise next week for members of Congress to take effect March 1 unless rejected before then by both houses. An advisory commission has recommended a 50 percent boost for lawmakers, federal judges and top executive branch officials, with members of Congress giving up lucrative honorariums in exchange. Current congressional pay is $89,500 a year, and the commission's proposal would raise it to $135,000. While Mitchell says the Senate will vote on any proposed pay raise, Democratic leaders in the House say they are hoping to have Reagan's proposal take effect without a vote. Under current law, Congress automatically gets a boost proposed by the president unless it votes it down. Leaders in both parties spoke of cooperation on the first day of the session. ``We're very optimistic that we're going to be able to work with Bush and we can solve some of the problems,'' said Rep. Tony Coelho, D-Calif., House majority whip. ``We need to have that cooperation. ... We'd like to resolve some problems and get rid of some of this confrontation.'' ``I think at least at the outset ... the appropriate tone is one of cooperation and a spirit of bipartisanship, and let's see how far we can go with that,'' said Rep. Dick Cheney, R-Wyo., House minority whip. 
A blind minister who was rescued by a part-time bus driver after falling under a commuter train on New Year's Day says his savior deserves a full-time job. ``I am so lucky,'' said Albert Barnett Jackson, 35, who broke his ankle in the accident as he was on his way to a New Year's Day service. ``But I always believe that there is a reason for everything.'' Jackson said that Charles Welch, the part-time Chicago Transit Authority bus driver, should get a citation and a full-time job from the CTA for his heroics. ``And for me, well, all I can say is hallelujah. I'm here and alive, so it will be a good year,'' Jackson said. Welch said he was riding on a southbound elevated train when he saw Jackson tapping his white cane along the platform. ``I won't forget that picture,'' Welch said Monday. ``I had flashbacks all last night of him walking up to the train and then just disappearing.'' Jackson, an associate minister at the People's Missionary Baptist Church, was trying to board the train when he stepped between two cars and fell onto the tracks. ``I thought I had gotten to the (train) door and so I stepped ahead and suddenly, before I knew anything, I was down on the tracks,'' Jackson said. ``And I screamed out, `Help me, somebody, oh help me, somebody.' And this voice, which I now know was Charles, told me, `Don't move. Don't touch anything and don't move,''' he said. Welch raced to the next car to tell the conductor not to start the train, then went to assist Jackson, who was lying very close to an electrified rail. Welch jumped down on the tracks and grabbed Jackson's arm. He also retrieved the man's cane and braille Bible. Another man then helped carry the victim to a bench. Jackson said he also survived a fall off a train platform in 1972, and a stabbing and robbery in his North Side apartment in 1986. For Welch, who has been a part-time bus driver for 16 months, it was the second time he has helped out in an emergency. He once wrestled a gun away from a young passenger on his bus. 
President Reagan spoke with the Democratic and Republican leaders of Congress from his Bel Air home Tuesday, saying he is confident that with their support, President-elect Bush ``will lead us in continued prosperity and peace.'' The White House said Reagan received a telephone call from the leaders and spoke with them for two minutes. On the telephone on Capitol Hill were Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell, D-Maine; Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole, R-Kan.; House Majority Leader Tom Foley, D-Wash.; and House Minority Leader Bob Michel, R-Ill. The White House announcement quoted the president as saying: ``Thank you and welcome back. Congratulations to all of you on your election to lead your parties in Congress. Please extend my best wishes to all of your newly elected colleagues sworn in today. This is the last of these phone calls for me, and I want to thank you all for your many kindnesses to Nancy and me over the years. ``As I hand over the reins to George Bush in a few days, I'll leave Washington confident that with your support he will lead us in continued prosperity and peace. I look forward to getting back and seeing all of you in the two short weeks remaining.'' 
Eddie Heywood Jr., a popular jazz pianist who composed ``Canadian Sunset,'' has died. He was 73. Heywood had a weak heart and had been in failing health, said family friend Fenton Walsh. He died at home Monday night. His widow, Evelyn, hoped to have memorial services for him in Atlanta, his hometown, and New York, where he was a popular participant in the late-night cafe society, Walsh said. The jazz player's version of Cole Porter's ``Begin the Beguine'' was popular in the 1940s, and after being sidelined by problems with his hands, Heywood returned with his composition of ``Canadian Sunset'' and other songs in the mid-1950s. His gentle-sounding tunes often were constructed around nature themes. He was named as a new star by Esquire magazine in 1945 and recorded with vocalists Billie Holliday and Ella Fitzgerald, as well as recording his own albums. Heywood had moved here from Martha's Vineyard about three years ago, Walsh said. Walsh is part of a local jazz group called The Unidentical Jazz Twins, and met Heywood at the Coral Square Mall in Coral Springs after his group played ``Canadian Sunset.'' ``He burst into tears. He couldn't believe people still were playing that,'' Walsh said. Heywood is survived by his wife and two sons, Robert and Edward. There are plans to start an Eddie Heywood Scholarship Fund, Walsh said. Arrangements were incomplete. 
With six weeks to go before Soviet troops are to be out of Afghanistan, the chairman of the Pakistan-based Afghan resistance on Tuesday announced a last-minute effort to form a transitional government. Sibghatullah Mojaddidi said a consultative council _ with half its members drawn from guerrilla commanders fighting Soviet and Afghan government troops _ would convene within two or three weeks. The council would draw up a transitional government. Apart from the difficulty of selecting and convening the more than 400 members of such a council, the decision offers the resistance little time to maneuver. The Soviet Union's first deputy foreign minister and ambassador to Kaubl, Yuli Vorontsov, planned to arrive in Islamabad, the Pakistani capital, on Wednesday and meet Mojaddidi by the end of the week. It will be the second session between the Kremlin's Afghan specialist and the rebels in attempts to find a political settlement to the Afghan war. The first meeting, in the Saudi Arabian city of Taif last month, was the Kremlin's first official recognition of the Moslem guerrillas it has been fighting for more than nine years. It was a tacit acknowledgment that Moscow is exploring a non-communist alternative to Preisdent Najib, head of the embattled government in Kabul. Vorontsov was in Tehran on Tuesday meeting Iranian-based leaders of Shiite Moslem Afghan guerrillas, who operate separately from the Sunni Moslem groups based in Peshawar. The main guerrilla alliance consists of seven squabbling parties who operate out of Peshawar under the name of the Islamic Unity of Afghan Mujahedeen. The group, generally called the alliance, rotates its chairmanship among the leaders of the seven groups every three months. Mojaddidi, who became chairman Jan. 1, is the leader of the Afghan National Liberation Front, one of the alliance's relatively moderate but least militarily effective groups. The decision to convene a consultative council, or shura, was announced after a fractious three-day meeting of the alliance's 140-member executive council. The council, comprised of 20 representatives from each of the seven parties, failed to unanimously endorse the plan, alliance sources said. Some executive council members also opposed more meetings with Vorontsov, the sources said on condition of anonymity. Mojaddidi said the council was a temporary measure because the war in Afghanistan makes an election impossible. At least two of the seven guerrilla leaders have advocated the election of a national parliament instead of summoning a consultative council. But Mojaddidi said the alliance's supreme council, consisting of the top leader of the seven Peshawar-based parties, approved the shura plan a week ago. He told a news conference the shura would have 400 or 500 members, with an equal number to be nominated by each of the seven parties. After the news conference, however, he told reporters each party would name 60 delegates for a total of 420. He said 50 percent of the delegates would be rebel commanders. The rest would include well-known intellectuals, tribal leaders and ``good Moslems.'' He rejected the participation of any officials of the current Soviet-style Kabul government. Mojaddidi's formula appears to exclude the Iranian-based Shiite guerrilla groups, but he said the seven Peshawar-based parties were free to nominate people who did not belong to their own ranks. Shiites comprise only about 17 percent of Afghanistan's population, but they make up about 40 percent of the Afghan refugees who have fled their country since 1978 when a communist government seized power through a coup and needed the Soviet Union's 1979 military intervention to survive. Of the estimated 15 million Afghans, one-third now live outside Afghanistan _ 3 million in Pakistan and 2 million in Iran. Asked whether the former Afghan king, Zahir Shah, would be asked to participate in the shura, Mojaddidi said any of the Peshawar-based groups was free to invite anyone. The new attempt to form an interim government will take place in Pakistan, Mojaddidi said. Asked where and how it would operate, he first predicted confidently that the Najib government would fall quickly after Feb. 15, when the Soviet Union is scheduled to withdraw its last remaining forces, estimated at about 50,000. But in response to questions, he said that if the guerrillas were not in control of the capital, the interim government would operate in provinces they did control. 
President Reagan asked Congress on Tuesday to ratify a treaty signed by more than a score of nations pledging punishment for terrorists who attack ships at sea or oil platforms offshore. ``The seizure of the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro in 1985, and the murder of American passenger Leon Klinghoffer, demonstrated that no country, or form of transportation, is immune from the criminal savagery of those who engage in terrorist acts,'' Reagan said. He said the agreement consists of a convention covering shipping and a protocol that deals with fixed platforms offshore. He said they are modeled on earlier treaties dealing with aircraft hijacking and sabotage and ``include provisions requiring states to provide severe punishment for such offenses, and to extradite or prosecute those who commit them.'' Work on the treaty began in 1986 under the auspices of the International Maritime Organization on the basis of an initial draft co-sponsored by Italy, Austria and Egypt. Both the convention and protocol were adopted at an international conference in Rome in March. The United States and 22 other states signed the convention and the United States and 20 other nations signed the protocol dealing with platforms. ``It is clear that the convention already has broad support in the international community, and it is hoped that all states will join in this major step to deter acts against the safety of maritime navigation,'' the president said. 
President Reagan announced Tuesday he has decided against tariffs or other action to curb oil imports, although conceding that ``the free world will become increasingly dependent on oil supplies from potentially insecure sources.'' The president acted on the recommendation of Commerce Secretary William Verity, who he said reported to him that import restrictions ``would not be cost effective and, in the long run, would impair rather than enhance national security.'' Verity's report was the outcome of an investigation requested in December 1987 by the National Energy Security Committee, a domestic oil industry group which said the president should use his powers to restrict import of goods where imports would hurt national security. Reagan said Verity concluded that ``there has been a substantial improvement in U.S. energy security'' since the last similar investigation in 1979. ``However, declining domestic oil production, rising oil imports and growing free world dependence on potentially insecure sources of supply raise a number of concerns, including vulnerability to a major supply disruption,'' the president said. ``The investigation found that the maintenance of U.S. access to sufficient supplies of petroleum is essential to our economic security, foreign policy flexibility and defense preparedness,'' he said. ``Given these factors, the secretary of commerce found that petroleum imports threaten to impair the national security.'' Imports of crude oil and refined products currently are running at about 41 percent of consumption, up from 31.5 percent in 1985 but not yet back to the 47.7 percent recorded in 1977, the peak year for imports. Several forecasts, including those of the Energy Department, predict that imports will reach and pass 50 percent in the 1990s. A department study concluded in 1987 that a $10-a-barrel tariff would add 120,000 jobs in the oil industry but cost 400,000 elsewhere in the economy; would bring $46 billion worth of benefits at a cost of $200 billion. Secretary John Herrington has said exemptions that would be politically necessary in any tariff plan to accommodate Canada and residential users of home heating oil in the U.S. Northeast would make it unworkable. Reagan said that, in deciding not to recommend any import restrictions, Verity took into account the administration's program to improve energy security. In particular, Reagan cited decontrol of oil prices and elimination of allocation controls as actions his administration has taken to strengthen the domestic oil industry. ``The Strategic Petroleum Reserve contains over 555 million barrels, compared to 108 million barrels eight years ago,'' he said. ``Today the nation is far less vulnerable to an oil supply disruption than in 1973 or 1979,'' he added. ``Despite these improvements, important energy security concerns remain,'' the president said, citing rising oil consumption, declining U.S. crude production and rising oil imports. ``In addition, projections show that the free world will become increasingly dependent on oil supplies from potentially insecure sources.'' In a message to Congress that accompanied his statement, the president urged the lawmakers to deregulate natural gas prices, permit expanded oil exploration in Alaska and the Outer Continental Shelf, liberalize the depletion allowance for oil and gas producers, streamline nuclear power licensing procedures and sell the Naval Petroleum Reserves at Elk Hills, Calif., and Teapot Dome, Wyo. The administration has advocated all these measures in Congress in recent years, but without success. The 1979 study was requested by the Treasury Department in 1978. Based on that study, then-President Carter determined that oil imports were a threat to U.S. security. 
Texas Democrat Jim Wright, re-elected Speaker of the House, pledged Tuesday to cooperate with George Bush and called on the president-elect to submit his budget recommendations within a month after taking office. ``Today I pledge to President (elect) Bush the earnest and unstinting cooperation of the leadership of cooperatin of the leadership of this House in seeking true bipartisanship in every area of our nation's foreign policy,'' Wright said a his speech to his colleagues accepting a second term as speaker. ``Because President-elect Bush has service in this House, I am encouraged that he will exhibit appreciation for the constitutional responsibilities of the Congress and will seek avenues of cooperation between our executive and legislative branches,'' he said. Wright said Republicans and Democrats within Congress must also learn to work together. The speaker _ known for strong-arm parliamentary tactics _ said he now is ``eager to encourage'' a House Republican role in policy making. Wright said the domestic agenda was plagued with ``three deficits: the budget deficit, the trade deficit, and the social deficit caused by the widening gap between the rich and poor'' as costs soar for housing, higher education and health care. ``By working together, we can help our new president fulfill his beautiful promise of `a kinder, gentler nation,''' he said. ``We in the House leadership are eager to help him attain the goals he has expressed of wider access for all Americans to education, to child care, to affordable housing and to a cleaner environment.'' Wright specifically pointed to cooperating with Jack Kemp, the former Republican congressman who Bush has chosen to head the Department of Housing and Urban Affairs. Kemp has long been an advocate of urban low-tax ``enterprise zones'' to lure business back to the inner city. For Congress to carry out its responsiblities on time, including approving a fiscal 1990 budget by April 15, the new president must submit his recommendations ``not later than Feb. 20,'' said Wright, who drew cheers from his colleagues for promising to get the legislative work done on time. Wright, himself the subject of a probe for allegedly violating ethics rules in his personal finances and for revealing government secrets, said he and Republican leader Bob Michel, R-Ill., would quickly appoint a panel to review House ethics rules. The speaker also repeated his promise to pursue changes in federal campaign law, including a bill passed by the House but not the Senate last year to have polls close at the same time across the nation in presidential elections. ``We can clean up the murky areas of campaign financing... and reduce the influence of special interests,'' he said. ``To profess love for democracy but disdain for politics is to pretend to honor the product while despising the process that creates the product,'' Wright said. ``Politics is as necessary to the functioning of a free society as water is to the flow of a river,'' he said. ``It doesn't have to be filthy and corrupted, and neither does the river.'' The Conservative Campaign Fund, a right-wing political action committee, filed on Tuesday with the Federal Election Commission a complaint against Wright. The group contends that Wright and his supporters illegally staged and financed a gala salute to the speaker four weeks before the November election without properly declaring it a campaign event. House Republicans wondered aloud about Wright's promise to treat them more fairly, as the Democrats rammed through on Tuesday a revised version of the House rules further limiting the GOP minority's parliamentary options in battling for their views. ``Was it just flim-flam, or was it serious?'' said Rep. Newt Gingrich, R-Ga., a conservative opponent of the speaker. 
When the Rev. Thomas Hooker delivered a sermon one Sunday in 1638, his oratory sparked the creation of the world's first written, democratic constitution _ one that served as a model for the U.S. Constitution. This year marks the 350th anniversary of that document, known as the Fundamental Orders, and the state of Connecticut plans to celebrate with ceremony and symposiums. The constitution, adopted on Jan. 14, 1639, also will be put on public display for the first time in 20 years. In his now famous sermon, Hooker, a Congregationalist minister, asserted that the power of government lay in ``the free consent of the people'' and ``that the choice of public magistrates belonged unto the people, by God's own allowance.'' His words spurred free planters to adopt the Fundamental Orders at a meeting in Hartford. ``Throughout the Colonial period, all other states, except Connecticut and Rhode Island, had royal governors and were basically run by an aristocracy,'' said Ralph G. Elliot, chairman of the U.S. Constitution Bicentennial Commission of Connecticut. ``No state had greater self government than Connecticut, starting in 1639.'' The state plans to spend $35,230 to mark the anniversary. The main event will be a public display of the 1639 Fundamental Orders, the Royal Charter of 1662, the state consitution of 1818 and the state constitution of 1965 at the Old State House in Hartford. 
Television evangelist Jim Bakker appealed for money Tuesday, the second day of his new show being broadcast to a half-dozen stations. But the retired judge who ruled over the PTL bankruptcy case said Bakker could not handle the millions of dollars raised in his first show. In his second broadcast since he was forced off the air two years ago in a sex-and-money scandal, Bakker asked listeners to send in ``$100, or $25 or more'' in return for a ``Crisis Book of Scripture.'' Bakker told viewers he did not want to raise funds every day, but expressed the belief the Heritage USA complex that was recently sold to a Canadian businessman would be restored to the PTL members who paid for it. Meanwhile, on ``CBS This Morning,'' Rufus Reynolds, the judge who supervised the $65 million sale of PTL's assets, said his ``stomach cringed'' at the way Bakker and his wife, Tammy Faye, handled the money he raised in the name of religion. ``They just wasted a lot of it,'' he said. ``Why take religious money collected for one purpose and throw it away for another? That's the whole picture.'' The broadcasts of the new ``Jim and Tammy'' show originated in the living room of the Bakkers' borrowed home and were sent by satellite to a six stations, mostly cable, in California, Ohio, New York, Pennsylvania and Louisiana, Bakker said. Bakker, 49, and a former top associate were indicted last month on charges of diverting $4 million in PTL money for their benefit. A trial date is expected to be set Jan. 17. The Bakkers had not preached together on television since January 1987. Two months later, allegations surfaced of his 1980 sexual encounter with church secretary Jessica Hahn, forcing Bakker to leave the PTL ministry. Bakker said one of his supporters donated money to put him back on the air for the first month. Mrs. Bakker said Tuesday she did not think daily fund-raising would be necessary. ``I believe God is going to start touching people's hearts,'' she said. ``I believe that we're not going to have to tell the people, that God will tell the people.'' But in the interview, the judge who ordered the Bakkers in a civil suit to repay the ministry $7.7 million in excessive benefits said Jim Bakker was ``not a very good businessman.'' Reynolds, who retired as a bankruptcy judge Saturday, said Bakker once chartered a plane for $130,000 ``just to take him out to California _ kept it out there two weeks. Things like that. Just money that you wouldn't think about spending, he did.'' 
Immigration agents seeking illegal aliens unlawfully used pretexts to enter job sites and sweep up Hispanic-looking workers, civil rights lawyers argued Tuesday at the start of a federal trial over the raids. But a government lawyer contended the Immigration and Naturalization Service has met constitutional requirements on searches, and noted that rulings by judges in other parts of the country have upheld INS practices. The central issue in the case before U.S. District Judge Robert Aguilar is the type of evidence the INS must show and what type of warrant it must present in entering a workplace and questioning and arresting workers who cannot prove legal residency. An array of groups representing Hispanics, labor unions and employers is seeking strict regulation of the agents who go to factories and farms in search of illegal aliens. The case affects only an INS region that covers most of northern and central California, from Bakersfield to the Oregon line. But lawyers in the case say it could be influential elsewhere. In opening statements and testimony from the first of more than 100 expected witnesses, the plaintiffs contended the federal agency since at least 1982 has violated constitutional standards that require warrants to identify the person or evidence being seized. ``Witnesses will establish that there is a consistent pattern of non-specific or general warrants,'' said Suzanne Needles, spokeswoman for the Employment Law Office of the San Francisco Legal Aid Society. ``A warrant would name two persons, but the INS would arrive with as many as 20 agents with guns drawn and visible, approach the property at high speed, locate the two persons named, and then approach anyone who appeared to be Hispanic, detaining U.S. citizens (as well as) undocumented workers.'' According to court papers, in 25 northern California raids the INS identified 32 people in search warrants but made 481 arrests. Aguilar has issued a preliminary injunction outlining warrant requirements for workplace entries. But Francisco Garcia, a lawyer for the Mexican-American Legal Defense and Educational Fund, contended the INS violated those standards last year in raids on a Sacramento factory and a Fort Bragg fishery. U.S. Attorney Joseph Russoniello, representing the INS, contended the agency has the right to enter a workplace with a warrant based on information that illegal aliens are there. Once inside, agents can question and arrest specific aliens, he said. ``The INS used the warrants of inspection solely for entry purposes and, after entry, independently developed the probable cause to arrest illegal aliens,'' Russoniello said in papers filed with the court. The lawsuit seeks court orders requiring specific warrants to arrest workers and prohibiting the INS from targeting workers of Hispanic ancestry for ``arrest and abuse.'' The case stems from INS raids in 1982 known as Operation Jobs because they were supposed to create job openings for U.S. citizens and legal residents. The first witnesses were from a mushroom farm in Petaluma that was raided by the INS in 1982, allegedly without a warrant or the owner's consent. Aguilar has issued a number of rulings against the INS in the case, but several have been reversed. He declared in 1982 that agents violated privacy rights by surrounding a workplace and questioning workers on the mere suspicion that they might be illegal aliens. After the Supreme Court overturned that ruling, Aguilar issued a new injunction in 1985, barring the INS from detaining or questioning workers who had not been specifically identified in a warrant. He also prohibited the INS practice of referring to one or two workers in a warrant along with unspecified ``others.'' The 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in 1986 upheld Aguilar's finding that the INS had an apparent ``systematic policy and practice'' of illegal searches. But the court overturned the requirement of specifically identifying workers. 
A Jehovah's Witness who was given a blood transfusion against her will won an appeal Tuesday that set aside a lower court's order for the transfusion, her lawyer said. The lawyer, Donald Ridley of the Jehovah's Witnesses, said the Appellate Division of state Supreme Court in Brooklyn also ruled that a hearing must be held before any new order for a transfusion is issued. The woman, Denise Nicoleau, 35, of Moriches, is in critical condition after giving birth to a boy by Caesarean section Thursday at Brookhaven Memorial Hospital on Long Island. After the birth, the woman continued to bleed and doctors performed an operation to stabilize her, but those efforts failed and on Friday doctors ordered a transfusion. However, Ms. Nicoleau, a registered nurse, and her husband Rico, a radiologist, told the hospital they did not want the transfusion because it conflicted with their religious beliefs. Jehovah's Witnesses contend blood transfusions violate the biblical passage in Leviticus that reads, ``Whatsoever man ... eats any manner of blood, I will cut him off from among his people.'' The hospital obtained a court order from state Supreme Court Justice Saverio Fierro in Hauppauge permitting the transfusion. Relatives surrounded Ms. Nicoleau's bed in an attempt to prevent the transfusion. Three were arrested on criminal trespass charges. Hospital spokesman Richard Semple said Tuesday that Ms. Nicoleau's condition has improved, but she remains critical. He refused to comment further. Ridley said there is no proof that the transfusion kept his client alive. Rather, he said, ``It could have exposed her to fatal complications.'' He said Ms. Nicoleau ``doesn't want to die. She wants her medical problems solved by non-blood means.'' Under state law, ``competent'' adult patients generally have the right to determine their own medical treatment. 
Former White House chief of staff Donald Regan says he hopes President-elect Bush will avoid President Reagan's ``baffling reluctance to give orders, or even guidance, to his close subordinates.'' In a paperback re-issue of his book, ``For The Record,'' Regan, who was ousted as Reagan's chief of staff in February 1987, said Bush, immediately after his inauguration, ``ought to tell his Cabinet and his staff exactly what he wants them to do, laying out his objectives in every field of policy in a way that cannot possibly be misunderstood.'' In the paperback update of Regan's book, which caused a stir in the spring of last year with its harsh judgments of Reagan's presidential management style, Regan also said Bush should consider a recession inevitable and must be prepared to deal with it. Regan could not immediately be reached for comment on the chapter that he added to his original ``For the Record,'' and spokeswoman Kathy Reed said the former chief of staff was in Florida. The re-issue of Regan's book is scheduled to hit the newstands and bookstores on Feb. 1. Sheila Tate, a spokeswoman at Bush's transition headquarters here, said that ``to my knowledge, he (Bush) has not solicited advice from Donald Regan. I do believe they have always had a cordial relationship.'' The initial publication of Regan's book caused a furor in the nation's capital, as Reagan and his wife, Nancy, denounced the former chief of staff for telling insider stories. White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater labeled Regan's work as ``a kiss-and-tell story in the mold of all books that seek to exploit the presidency or the first family for personal self-interest.'' In his initial book, Regan, among other things, depicted Reagan as a hands-off president who was a reluctant decision-maker, and said much of the Reagan's schedule was dictated by Nancy's reliance on the advice of an astrologer. In ``The New Presidency,'' the chapter Regan added in the paperback to be published by St. Martin's Press, Inc., the former chief of staff said that while he believes Bush ``understands the lessons of Reagan's successes,'' he also said Bush ``must sometimes stand against his advisers.'' ``As long as he listens to his own instincts, and to the voice of his own experience, the American people will be well-served,'' Regan said of Bush. ``It is to be hoped that President Bush will make it equally clear from the start of his administration that he has learned from Reagan's shortcomings _ his baffling reluctance to give orders, or even guidance, to his close subordinates, and the tendency to permit some of his advisers to manage the presidency for effect rather than for results,'' Regan said. He said Bush ``must bring the White House's relationship with the news media under control, so that he and his people spend the greater part of their time dealing with the reality of the nation's problems, rather than catering to the natural tendency of the media to transform the presidency into entertainment.'' A source in the Bush transition office, declining to be named publicly, said Bush has not spoken with Regan except during a chance encounter the pair had at Burning Tree Country Club, a suburban Maryland golf course, when Bush when there last summer to play golf with longtime friend James A. Baker III. 
The 101st Congress opened Tuesday with leaders from both parties urging cooperation in solving old problems under the new president. Here are some of the issues facing Congress: 

Members must decide whether to approve a 50 percent pay raise to $135,000 for themselves and 2,500 other top officials in the executive and judicial branches. Many lawmakers contend it is difficult to live on their $89,500 base salary. House leaders promise to ban honorariums, the speaking fees earned by many legislators, if the raise is approved. 

Before fiscal 1990 begins Oct. 1, Congress and the president must agree to cut more than $25 billion in spending, or to raise taxes, to meet the goals of the Gramm-Rudman budget balancing law. 

Tens of billions of dollars are needed to bail out failing savings and loan institutions. 

Billions of dollars are needed to upgrade the nation's aging nuclear weapon production plants. The Department of Energy is proposing an $81 billion program to modernize dangerous and outdated facilities and deal with radioactive and chemical contamination. 

Environmental legislation, including a clean air bill that died late in the last session, will rank high on the agenda. 

Congress faces demands for more federally subsidized health care, especially for the elderly. But at the same time, the elderly are objecting to paying increased premiums for the new catastrophic illness coverage approved last year. 

Ethics legislation will be back again after President Reagan killed bills to restrict lobbying by former government officials and to protect federal employees who blow the whistle on wrongdoing in their agencies. 

Senate committees plan quick confirmation hearings on members of the new Cabinet and other top appointees. 
A nephew of the late President Gamal Abdel Nasser was arrested Tuesday after returning from self-imposed exile in London to stand trial on charges of complicity in attacks against Israeli and U.S. diplomats. Dr. Gamal Shawky Abdel Nasser was immediately hauled into court, then released on $260 bail. He and 19 other defendants are alleged to belong to a group called Egypt's Revolution. Prosecutors allege the group launched attacks from 1984 to 1987 in which two Israeli diplomats were killed and six wounded. Two U.S. diplomats also suffered minor injuries. Among the defendants is President Nasser's eldest son, Khaled, who remains a fugitive in Yugoslavia. He is one of the prime defendants and could face a death sentence if convicted of the charges against him. Gamal Nasser, a physician accused of failing to report a gunshot wound inflicted on an attacker by one of the American victims, pleaded innocent. The trial adjourned until Jan. 24. The late president's nephew was arrested at Cairo International Airport after he stepped off a flight from London, ending a 14-month absence. He and Khaled Abdel Nasser were outside Egypt when the indictment was issued last February against the 20 defendants. The indictment charged Khaled Abdel Nasser and 10 co-defendants with murder, undermining Egypt's security and damaging its relations with Israel and the United States. It demanded they be condemned to death. The remaining nine defendants, including Gamal Nasser, were charged with complicity of various kinds and could be sentenced on conviction to prison terms of up to 25 years. The trial began in November. Tuesday's hearing was mainly procedural, with the lawyers demanding an end to solitary confinement imposed on the 11 defendants facing possible death sentences. 
Two courts on Tuesday rejected appeals to block the hanging of two Sikhs for the 1984 assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, news agencies reported. In one appeal, the Supreme Court refused to consider Kehar Singh's petition that said his sentence should be commuted to life in prison because of excessive delay in carrying it out, the United News of India and Press Trust of India reported. The men were convicted and sentenced in 1986. The news agencies also reported that the Delhi High Court rejected Kehar Singh's appeal challenging the president's refusal to grant him clemency. The other condemned man, Satwant Singh, is not appealing. However, Kahar Singh's appeals have also stayed his execution under Indian law. Kehar Singh's lawyers vowed to take the clemency part of his appeals before the Supreme Court on Wednesday. President Ramaswamy Venkataraman rejected clemency Monday after the Supreme Court ordered him to reconsider his refusal in November. He gave no explanation of Monday's decision, which automatically lifted a stay blocking execution of the two convicted men. Warrants reordering the execution were issued immediately after the president's decision. The date has been kept secret for security reasons. The two men are being held on death row in New Delhi's maximum security Tihar Jail. Mrs. Gandhi was shot in the garden of her New Delhi residence on Oct. 31, 1984, by two of her Sikh bodyguards. One of them, Beant Singh, was killed in a shootout with other bodyguards minutes later. The other was Satwant Singh, 24. Kehar Singh, 54, is a maternal uncle of Beant Singh and unrelated to Satwant Singh. He was convicted of conspiracy and sentenced to death. Mrs. Gandhi's assassination evidently was carried out in revenge for an army raid she had ordered on the Golden Temple in Amritsar, the holiest Sikh shrine, four months earlier to rid the complex of Sikh militants holed up inside. The militants have been fighting a six-year guerrilla war for a separate nation in northern Punjab state. They claim discrimination by the country's Hindu majority, who comprise more than 80 percent of India's 880 million people. Sikhs make up less than 2 percent of the national population but hold a slight majority in Punjab. More than 2,400 people were killed in Sikh militant violence in 1988. 
U.N. military observers in Angola formally began work Tuesday to monitor the withdrawal of 50,000 Cuban troops, just one week before the first contingent of 3,000 soldiers is to leave. The United Nations announced that the first 30 men of a projected 70-man observer group started operations in the southern African nation as part of the U.N. Angola Verification Mission. The Cuban Mission, meanwhile, said the first contingent of about 3,000 men will leave Angola on Jan. 10. The official Angolan news agency ANGOP reported that Brig. Gen. Pericles Ferreira Gomes of Brazil, the chief military observer of the verification mission, arrived Tuesday in the Angolan capital of Luanda and established his headquarters there. He will command observers sent by Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Congo, Czechoslovakia, India, Jordan, Norway, Spain and Yugoslavia. ANGOP, monitored in Lisbon, Portugal, also reported that U.S. civil rights leader Jesse Jackson met Tuesday with Angolan President Jose Eduardo dos Santos to discuss the situation in southern Africa. Jackson, who unsuccessfully sought the Democratic presidential nomination last year, also met with Foreign Minister Afonso Van Dunen, ANGOP said. Jackson began a four-day visit to Angola Monday as part of an African tour. The Cuban troops have been helping Marxist Angola fight rebels backed by South Africa and the United States. Under an agreement signed Dec. 22 by Cuba and Angola, the entire force is to be withdrawn by July 1, 1991. The first contingent is to leave before April 1. That is when adjoining Namibia, or South-West Africa, begins its one-year transition to independence, granted in another agreement signed on Dec. 22. The Namibia accord was signed by South Africa as well as Angola and Cuba. South Africa occupied Namibia, a former German colony, during World War I and has governed it since then. The Security Council on Tuesday was back to square one in efforts to create a U.N. Namibia peacekeeping force as five permanent members _ the United States, the Soviet Union, China, Britain and France, each with veto power _ stood firm on cutting costs and the 102-member non-aligned movement refused. On Saturday, hours before the 1989 council was formed, the 15 council members failed to create the force because of a deadlock between the five permanent members and the six members on the council from the non-aligned movement. A seventh non-aligned country, Malaysia, now is on the council. 
The husband of a long-missing woman was charged with murder Tuesday after his wife's body was found frozen in a locked ice chest at the couple's home, authorities said. Leonard Tyburski, 45, of Canton Township was arraigned in 35th District Court on one count of murder in the death of Dorothy Tyburski, 37, who disappeared in October 1985. The degree was not specified. ``I've been a lawyer, a prosecutor and a judge for more than 30 years and this is definitely a little different,'' said Judge James Garber, who arraigned Tyburski. ``It's not your everyday thing. ``It has some indications of Edgar Allen Poe and even some Alfred Hitchcock,'' the judge said after ordering Tyburski held without bond in the Wayne County Jail. Tyburski is in charge of attendance at Mackenzie High School in Detroit, school officials said. He will undergo psychiatric evaluation to determine if he is competent to stand trial, Garber said. One of the couple's two daughters, 20-year-old Kelly Tyburski, pried the lock off the chest-type freezer and found her mother's clothed body Monday, according to detectives. ``I believe (the freezer) was there during the whole time period, but it never came into play,'' said Canton Township Police Detective Keith Lazar. He said investigators searched for the woman for about two years before dropping the case for a lack of leads. The daughter ``was suspicious, the actions of her father, she was dreaming about it, that her mother was somewhere ... in the house,'' he said. ``Her father made up stories about why the key was missing for the freezer.'' The cause of Mrs. Tyburski's death was undetermined, Lazar said. An autopsy was scheduled for later this week. Neighbors of the family said the Tyburskis seemed friendly, but that they seldom spoke with Mrs. Tyburski, who kept to herself and raised rabbits in the garage of the family's suburban home about 25 miles west of Detroit,. Tyburski had reported his wife missing, said Lt. Larry Stewart, a Canton Township police detective assigned to the case, and he told police his wife may have left because of emotional problems stemming from the death of a sister. Police never suspected foul play in the disappearance and handled it as a missing person case, questioning Tyburski more as a source of help than as a murder suspect, he said. ``We've done a lot of work and come up with nothing,'' he said. ``All investigations led nowhere.'' 
The Environmental Protection Agency proposed requirements Tuesday for the land disposal of 72 types of wastes, part of a continuing program that eventually will ban the disposal of more than 450 hazardous materials unless they are first treated. The EPA said the 72 waste products under the latest proposed regulations involve about 1.7 billion gallons a year of hazardous waste including some cyanide-containing industrial wastes. The proposed treatment is expected to cost industries involved about $25 million a year, the agency said. The most toxic and most widely discharged wastes already are banned from land disposal without prior treatment under existing EPA regulations covering 62 types of wastes. The agency said in a statement that most of the 72 types of wastes covered by the latest proposed regulation will meet the proposed treatment requirements if incincerated before being buried. 
The official Soviet news agency Tass on Tuesday denied reports in the Western news media that 17 more survivors were found in a ruined bakeshop more than three weeks after the Dec. 7 earthquake in Armenia. French and British broadcast reports said the survivors existed on grain and melted snow until they were discovered in the wrecked city of Spitak in northwestern Armenia. But Tass quoted Norik Muradyan, chief of rescue operations in Spitak, as saying Tuesday in a telephone interview: `The last living person was removed by rescuers from the ruins of buildings and structures in Spitak 10 days ago. ``The Western press reports that supposedly 17 living people were found in Spitak on the 24th day after the natural disaster have no foundation.'' The agency said 28 additional bodies were pulled from the rubble since Thursday, bringing the total of recovered bodies to 24,888. Europe 1 radio in Paris on Monday quoted a nurse for Doctors of the World, a French humanitarian group, as saying the 17 survivors were found in a bread factory near Spitak on Wednesday. It said the nurse, speaking on condition of anonymity, reported they survived by eating grain and drinking melted snow. The London commercial radio station LBC reported that French medics said the 17 were found Saturday. The quake leveled Spitak, where 25,000 people had lived. 
Rep. Robert Dornan offered advice to President-elect Bush on Tuesday for dealing with the AIDS epidemic: launch a just-say-no campaign involving sex and make experimental drugs available to people with the disease. ``There's no such thing as safe sex, there's safer sex,'' Dornan, R-Calif., told a news conference. Dornan said a special review board should be set up to approve use of experimental drugs on terminally ill patients who request them. In a letter to Bush, Dornan also suggested that federal money intended to finance treatment of AIDS patients should be funneled through a single federal program. ``Such a program would replace the existing programs that are overburdened, inadequate, and inappropriate to the specific health care needs of AIDS patients,'' Dornan wrote. ``I also believe that AIDS can only be brought under control through a fundamental shift in our values pertaining to sexual relations,'' Dornan wrote. ``That is why I would encourage you ... and your eventual surgeon general to adopt a `just say no' approach to dealing with the question of what constitutes safe sex.'' Dornan said he was not making a moral statement about homosexual behavior but was concerned about stopping the spread of the disease, which renders the body incapable of resisting other diseases and infections. He said it was ``fine'' if homosexuals wanted to practice safe sex by using ``erotic telephone conversations.'' 
At least 323 people died on the nation's highways during the four-day New Year's holiday weekend, but the toll reported Tuesday was well below a pre-holiday projection by safety experts. The National Safety Council had estimated that between 350 and 450 would die in a statement released before the weekend tally began at 6 p.m. local time Friday. The count ended at midnight Monday. The state with the highest toll was California, where 39 traffic deaths were reported, followed by Florida with 34 deaths and Texas with 31. Statisticians for the Chicago-based council said about 330 people could be expected to die in traffic accidents during a three-day non-holiday weekend at this time of the year. Last year, 375 people were killed in highway accidents during a four-day observance of the holiday. The highest toll for a New Year's weekend was logged in 1965, when 564 people were killed during a three-day holiday. 
A frostbitten man sought in a weekend manhunt after the fatal shooting of a sheriff's deputy was charged in his hospital bed Tuesday with 10 felony counts stemming from the death. Raul Lopez, 31, was told of the charges in his room at Flagstaff Regional Medical Center, where he was in fair condition with frostbite. The charges include assault and burglary stemming from the Saturday night shooting of Deputy Bob Varner and the subsequent manhunt. Lopez was one of two men sought by police. The other, Douglas Savory, 45, who police believe was the primary gunman in Varner's death, was found dead Monday with a self-inflicted gunshot wound in the face. Sedillo set bond at $311,675 for Lopez and scheduled a Jan. 11 preliminary hearing in Navajo County Superior Court in Holbrook. Police arrested Lopez on Monday without incident after he was seen limping along a street in Holbrook, about 33 miles east of Winslow, where Savory was found dead. Varner, 51, was shot three times on Saturday night after he tried to make a traffic arrest on Interstate 40, the east-west freeway across northern Arizona. He died Monday. The attackers abandoned their stolen California car near Joseph City and briefly took hostage a Joseph City couple in their home. The men stole the couple's car and abandoned it in a ditch, fleeing on foot, authorities said. Navajo County Sheriff Gary Butler called Savory ``an extremely dangerous man.'' On Monday, he said, Savory shot at officers and a police helicopter and then shot himself. ``Every time we had contact with him, he turned on us,'' Butler said. ``He shot officer Varner before he even had a chance to react. He turned on two of our cars while we were trying to pursue him. Every time that we made contact with him, I ended up with several bullet holes in my patrol cars.'' Police said little was known about Lopez, who they described as a survivalist. Sedillo said the absence of homicide charges left him no choice but to allow bond for Lopez. He said county officials had told him they were preparing other counts. Arizona law allows a person to be charged with murder or other felonies committed as the result of the defendant's participation in a different crime. Sgt. Allan Schmidt of the state Department of Public Safety said Savory died two to three hours before his body was found. Cabin owner John Thompson had called police early Monday after he went to the cabin and saw that someone had broken in. The cabin is less than a quarter-mile from Interstate 40, and traffic was rerouted around a 33-mile stretch for at least six hours on Monday until Savory's body was found. Officers cheered when they learned Savory was dead. Schmidt said a California warrant from San Bernardino County accused Savory of robbery and kidnapping in a September gun-store robbery in which five other people have been arrested. Savory also allegedly was involved in manufacturing and sale of illegal weapons and explosives, Schmidt said. Lopez apparently separated from Savory on Saturday night and spent part of that night hiding under a boat along the Little Colorado River, officials said. Lopez walked along the river Sunday to Holbrook, where he spent the night at a motel, they said. 
Former Teamsters President Roy Williams says he reluctantly helped mob bosses obtain a $60 million loan from a union pension fund on the advice of Jimmy Hoffa after his family was threatened. Williams said two men working for Nick Civella, the late Kansas City crime boss, blindfolded him in 1974 and took him to a building and threatened to kill his wife and children if he didn't use his influence to obtain the loan for Civella. ``So what the heck can you do?'' Williams said. ``I went along, that's all. And who are you if you don't protect your family?'' His remarks were published Tuesday in the Warrensburg Star-Journal, which interviewed him last month at his farm south of Warrensburg near Leeton. Williams, 73 and in poor health, was released from a federal prison in Springfield in September after serving three years of a 10-year sentence for attempting to bribe then-Sen. Howard Cannon of Nevada in 1979. Williams was Teamsters president from 1981 until April 1983, when he was forced to resign in order to stay out of prison while appealing his conviction. He is cooperating with the U.S. Justice Department in New York, which has filed a civil suit aimed at removing Teamsters officials and mobsters who allegedly have corrupted the union. Last month, he gave a deposition from his home that was beamed to New York by satellite so that a federal judge could observe the proceedings and make comments. Williams joined the Teamsters in 1938 as a truck driver and later became a protege of Hoffa, who was Teamsters president from 1958 to 1971. Hoffa disappeared in 1975 and was presumed murdered. Williams said Hoffa advised that he help get the $60 million loan for Civella and the Argent Corp. to buy Las Vegas casinos. ``He said: `You can run but you can't hide. You can quit, but you can't hide. And they were here a long time before us and they will be here a long time after we are gone. And they are in every large local union, every council, including the AFL-CIO, and they thrive on pension plans. Because they don't intend to work. That's where the money is.''' Williams, who was paid $1,500 a month by Civella from late 1974 until mid-1981 in exchange for securing the loans, said the loans were repaid and that the union no longer has money invested in Las Vegas. Williams said he knew nothing about the skimming of gambling receipts from the Las Vegas casinos, which led to the Argent Corp. skimming trial that resulted in prison terms for mob bosses from Chicago, Milwaukee, Cleveland and Kansas City. In the interview, Williams claimed he never attempted to bribe the Nevada senator and that he was set up by Frank Fitzsimmons, who was Teamsters president while Hoffa was in prison. Williams was convicted in 1982 along with four other men of offering Cannon exclusive rights to buy a choice piece of Teamster-owned property in Las Vegas at a bargain price. In exchange, the senator was to help in defeating legislation to deregulate the trucking industry. Cannon was never charged, and the legislation became law. 
An adviser to PLO chief Yasser Arafat said Tuesday that investigators should not expect too much help from the group in tracking down the bombers of Pan Am Flight 103. The adviser, Khaled Hassen, repeated the Palestine Liberation Organization's offer to help in the investigation. But he said FBI director William Sessions was mistaken when he asserted Sunday that Arafat has a ``wealth of information'' to give to the investigation. ``I think the PLO is ready to help but that doesn't mean what the director of the FBI said, that Arafat has a wealth of information,'' Hassen said in an interview with Britain's Channel 4 comercial network. ``It doesn't mean we have a file that we can pick up and give to the Americans and say, well, it was done this way by so and so,'' he said. Hassen was asked if a radical Palestinian faction led by Abu Nidal, which opposes Arafat's peace overtures to Israel, might be responsible for the Dec. 21 crash, in which 270 people died. ``I doubt that Abu Nidal would do something like that,'' he said. ``Because they (the victims) were Americans. Abu Nidal was always against Israelis and against Palestinians (loyal to Arafat), but not against Americans, not American people.'' Asked what Arafat would do if it turned out that a Palestinian group was responsible, Hassen said: ``All those who are under the protection of any of the Arab governments _ we can do nothing to them. If Arafat can get hold of them he will put them in front of the court.'' He said he thought Arafat would not hand over the suspects to the United States or Britain for trial. ``If he got them, and they are Palestinians he has to put them in front of the Palestinian court.'' He did not elaborate. Hassen said he did not think the bombing was the work of Palestinians seeking to undermine the PLO's peace efforts. ``I don't see any organization which is up to the standard of doing what was done if it is a bomb and if it is that kind of technology they are talking about on television. There must be either a government or a highly experienced secret branch somewhere,'' he said. Another PLO official, Faisal Aouidha, said in a separate interview that it would not be difficult to discover the perpetrators. ``I am sure there are ways and means we can find out, one way of the other, and it's not very difficult to find out,'' Aouidha, a PLO spokesman in London, said on the British Broadcasting Corp. television news. ``We know the people, we know how to get with them, the countries they live in and we are really convinced it's not Palestinian groups which have done it _ which gives us a better way even to go into an investigation of the matter,'' he said. 
Col. Moammar Gadhafi has stepped up a campaign to improve Libya's foreign image and rebut charges that he is building a chemical weapons plant. In recent weeks, the Libyan leader purportedly helped free two French girls held hostage in Lebanon, offered to return the body of a U.S. pilot killed in a 1986 attack on Libya, and invited television correspondents to interview him. In addition, he has appealed to international organizations from the United Nations to the Arab League to defend him, and he has used friendly nations to convey to Washington his contention the plant does not produce chemical weapons. ``There is no doubt that the Libyans have launched what has become known as their charm offensive in Europe,'' said a British Foreign Office official Tuesday, speaking on condition of anonymity. In Washington, State Department spokesman Charles Redman said Tuesday that Libya has secretly started producing limited quantities of chemical weapons at the plant near Rabtha, about 50 miles southwest of Tripoli. A statement Tuesday by the official Libyan news agency, JANA, accused the United States of lying about the plant as an excuse to attack Libya and kill Gadhafi. The United States, along with at least 20 other countries, produces chemical weapons. Attention has focused on Libyan-U.S. relations in recent weeks after President Reagan told an interviewer that a military attack on the plant near the Libyan capital of Tripoli was under consideration, although Gadhafi says the facility makes pharmaceuticals. A U.S. carrier group steamed toward the Mediterranean on Tuesday in what the Pentagon said was a normal rotation of forces, but the movement prompted speculation of an impending strike. Italian newspapers and politicians billed the ships as a direct threat to Libya. The U.S. Navy has said the movement of the nuclear-powered aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt and 12 other ships in its battle group is part of a ``previously scheduled, routine deployment to the U.S. Sixth Fleet.'' A Reagan spokesman on Tuesday declined comment on the reports. Gadhafi's reaction to the U.S. charges is more conciliatory than his response to threats of an attack three years ago. But whether he will succeed in winning allies is unknown. ``I think it's pretty clear that he did not believe the U.S. would bomb the country in '86,'' said Lisa Anderson, a Columbia University professor and a leading U.S. specialist on Libya. ``Now, I think he takes threats on the part of the U.S. _ and even floating ideas in op-ed pieces by people who are not part of the (Reagan) administration _ extremely seriously.'' Shortly before the April 15, 1986, strike on Tripoli and Benghazi, Gadhafi threatened a campaign of subversion in the United States. Earlier that year, he defied U.S. forces to cross his ``line of death'' in the Gulf of Sidra off Libya. But since the U.S. State Department alleged in September that Libya was on the verge of making chemical weapons, Gadhafi has portrayed himself as the victim of U.S. aggression. After the United States said it was talking with allies about a possible raid on the factory, Gadhafi called Dec. 24 for the release of hostages, particularly two French girls held in Lebanon by a Libyan-backed Palestinian group for a year. Marie-Laure Betille, and her sister, Virginie, were handed over to French officials in Tripoli six days later. Gadhafi followed up with an appeal on French TV for the release of the girls' mother. But in France, newspapers alleged he was using the children to boost his image. Anderson said in her telephone interview that during his 20 years in power, Gadhafi won support domestically but has not learned how to generate positive international public opinion. Gadhafi also offered to return the body of a U.S. soldier, using the Vatican as an intermediary. There has been no indication whether the offer will be fulfilled. Arab governments have rallied behind Gadhafi and the Arab League council met in emergency session in late December to denounce the U.S. warning. Gadhafi dispatched a top aide, Staff Maj. Abdulsalam Jalloud, to Italy in November for talks. Italy's foreign minister, Giulio Andreotti, then sent a telegram to U.S. Secretary of State George Shultz describing Libyan assurances about the plant. Libya, again through the Italians, then invited the United States to visit the plant. Washington said it needed more than one trip. Libya says it abides by all accords on chemical arms. It plans to send Jalloud to a multinational conference on chemical weapons this week in Paris. 
Rescue workers ended their search inside the sunken Bateau Mouche on Tuesday and said all bodies now were off the tourist boat, which capsized on New Year's Eve and drowned at least 53 revelers. Two bodies were recovered from the bay on Tuesday. Valmir Rabelo of the Fire Department's Maritime Group said that ``any further search for victims will be on the bottom of Guanabara Bay. We doubt we will find more bodies, though it's possible one or two might wash up on Rio beaches in the next days.'' The victims had sailed out hoping to watch a fireworks display from the ocean off famed Copacabana beach. Police still have no exact count of how many were on the flat-bottomed boat when it sank 15 minutes before the New Year. Estimates range from 130 to 150. Owners said the only passenger list sank with the boat. The number of rescued also is not known. Operators of one boat said they alone saved 30 people. Rio Gov. Wellington Moreira Franco told a news conference Wednesday, ``Evidence shows that someone is responsible for this tragedy, and they will be punished. We will make sure that those who are responsible for the sinking will go where they belong _ to jail.'' Survivors told of overloading, of not as many life jackets as needed, of life preservers tied to boat rails and of the boat swaying precariously from side to side in the rough seas shortly before it sank. But a navy communique on Monday said the excursion boat was neither overcrowded nor dangerous and carried more than enough life preservers, according to inspections on Dec. 28 and just two hours before the tragedy. 
A federal appeals court Tuesday temporarily barred the judge in the Iran-Contra case from giving prosecutors a summary of Oliver L. North's defense, possibly delaying the former White House aide's trial. The three-judge panel of the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals agreed to consider North's challenge of U.S. District Judge Gerhard A. Gesell's decision to let prosecutors see the summary of classified information defense lawyers want to elicit from high government officials during the trial. In a related development, Gesell refused to allow further censoring of 300 classified documents prosecutors want to use as evidence against North. The ruling again raised the possibility that major charges against North could be scuttled if the government refuses to divulge classified information at the trial. But an administration official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said it was too early to assess the impact of Gesell's decision on the case against North. The judge's decision does not spell the end of the case, the official said, adding that it may only force prosecutors to drop certain documents as evidence against North. pickup 4th graf pvs bgng:``Gesell denied 
Gesell denied a motion filed last month by independent counsel Lawrence E. Walsh to seek to accommodate objections of U.S. intelligence agencies to the court's Dec. 12 order. Meanwhile, North's lawyers subpoenaed Secretary of State George P. Shultz and four other State Department officials, including Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams, the top department official for Latin American policy. Also subpoenaed were Undersecretary Michael H. Armacost, legal adviser Abraham Sofaer and M. Charles Hill, Shultz's executive assistant. North also has had subpoenas issued for President Reagan and President-elect Bush. North is scheduled to go to trial Jan. 31 in U.S. District Court. But the appellate panel's action could delay the trial while it considers what the defense called ``grave constitutional issues'' involving North's right to a fair trial. Gesell's refusal to accomodate some of the objections of U.S. intelligence agencies to divulging certain classified information in the prosecution exhibits also raises new problems for Walsh. The judge is insisting, for instance, that references to Iran, Israel and Central American nations remain in the documents, despite a government request that the nations be referred to by letter. The CIA and other agencies also object to the judge's requirement that the full text of intelligence reports be presented verbatim. Gesell, meanwhile, granted Walsh permission to subpoena North's daily diaries of his activities that were kept throughout his involvement in the Iran-Contra affair. The judge gave North until Jan. 18 to either produce the spiral notebooks or object to turning over the material, which would be a key piece of evidence for prosecutors. In the dispute over the summary of the defense case, the defends contends that giving the 162-page document to Walsh will give prosecutors an unfair look at the defense strategy for the former National Security Council aide. The appellate panel agreed to consider North's request for a writ of mandamus that would permanently bar Gesell from turning over the defense summary to Walsh. It also issued an administrative stay that prohibited Gesell from proceeding with his original plan to give Walsh the summary by 4 p.m. on Tuesday. ``The purpose of the administrative stay is to permit the court sufficient opportunity to consider the pending motion and petition and should not be construed in any way as a ruling on the merits,'' said the brief order by Circuit Judges Kenneth Starr, James Buckley and David Sentelle. The stay has no time limit, so it could delay the scheduled start of North's trial on charges he conspired with three co-defendants to illegally divert more than $14 million in U.S.-Iran arms-sale profits to the Nicaraguan rebels, known as Contras. The summary would provide prosecutors with ``a detailed road map to the defense case and to potential cross-examination of prosecution witnesses,'' North's lawyers said in court papers. ``No defendant in the history of federal criminal jurisprudence has been compelled to reveal before trial the details of anticipated defense testimony on virtually every disputed factual issue in the case,'' North's lawyers said. In reply papers filed Tuesday, Walsh told the appeals court that he needed access to the defense summary in order to determine whether the classified information North wants to disclose in testimony is relevant to the case. Under the Classified Information Procedures Act, the defense must notify the government of its intention to disclose any classified information at public trial. In addition to seeking to disclose thousands of pages of documents, North has proposed revealing a variety of secrets, possibly about covert operations, while questioning current and former government officials called as witnesses in the case. Former national security adviser John M. Poindexter and arms dealers Albert Hakim and Richard V. Secord, also charged in the case, are scheduled to be tried separately. 
The only sailor sent to the brig for the drowning of a recruit during rescue-swimmer training has been released, but neither his case nor the debate over the Navy's practices is over. A court-martial in September convicted Petty Officer 3rd Class Michael Combe, 28, of negligent homicide and conspiracy to commit battery in the death of Airman Recruit Lee Mirecki, 19. Combe's 90-day sentence would have been up Dec. 21, and he was released about two weeks early for good behavior, said Cmdr. Dennis Hessler, a spokesman for the Pensacola-based Naval Education and Training Command. He also was reduced in rank one grade. Mirecki drowned March 2 in a training pool at Pensacola Naval Air Station after several instructors pushed him back in the water when he panicked and climbed out, shouting that he wanted to quit the voluntary training. The job of a rescue swimmer is to jump out of helicopters to aid downed fliers. Combe was accused of repeatedly forcing Mirecki's head under water. Other students said they were ordered to face away from Mirecki and sing the ``Star Spangled Banner'' while he was in the water with Combe. Combe, of Tempe, Ariz., is on leave, but has been attached to the Pensacola base's Facilities Maintenance Department pending further action on his case, Hessler said. It is unlikely he will return to the Rescue Swimmer School, he said. The court-martial's verdict will not be final until it is reviewed by Vice Adm. John S. Disher, chief of naval education and training. Disher, who could approve or reject the decision, has yet to receive a transcript of the case, and Hessler said it would be at least a month more before the admiral decides. At that point, Combe can appeal to the Judge Advocate General's Office in Washington, D.C. His lawyers have said they intend to appeal if the admiral upholds the decision. Once the admiral's review is complete, Combe's commanding officer could recommend to the Naval Military Personnel Command in Washington that the sailor receive an administrative discharge. One reason allowed for an administrative discharge is conviction of a felony, which would include negligent homicide, Hessler said. Mirecki's death spurred numerous changes designed to make rescue-swimmer training safer and a review of all hazarous training in the Navy. But the General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress, issued an interim report that charged the Navy failed to go far enough to improve the safety of rescue-swimmer training. The new regulations prohibit instructors from touching trainees and require training to cease immediately if a student is panicky, fatigued or asks to quit. ``Sharks and daisies,'' the exercise being conducted at the time of Mirecki's death, also was banned. In that drill, instructors playing the role of panicked drowning victims would grab trainees in head holds. The students were supposed to extricate themselves by dragging the instructors underwater to break their holds. The interim GAO report stated that the new rules allowing students to drop out or take time out are ``not adequately formalized or standardized,'' leaving too much room to instructor discretion. The report also contended instructors are inadquately screened to determine their suitability for the high-risk training and don't receive proper training for that job. Court-martial testimony revealed Mirecki had a fear of being dragged under water, but that information was not given to instructors although it was available from his training and medical records. A pathologist concluded Mirecki literally was scared to death when his phobia triggered heart failure that was followed by drowning. Four other enlisted instructors received administrative penalties of rank reductions or fines in the case, and the commanding officer of the Naval Aviation Schools Command was reprimanded before his retirement earlier this year. One other court-martial was held. Lt. Thomas A. Torchia, 32, of Princeton, Ill., was acquitted of dereliction of duty. Torchia had been officer in charge of the swimmer school. 
Investigators have little hope of ever finding the missing bodies of 28 people killed in the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, police sources said Tuesday. In London, the head of the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration called for tighter security for all American flights in Europe and the Middle East in the wake of the bombing of the jumbo jet. A government prosecutor in West Germany said the bomb had been in the forward luggage compartment that contained baggage loaded both in Frankfurt and London. Flight 103 exploded over Scotland and crashed Dec. 21, killing all 259 people aboard and 11 on the ground. Flaming wreckage was scattered over 150 square miles of countryside. Police sources, speaking on condition they not be identified, said investigators see little chance that the missing bodies of 20 passengers and eight residents would ever be found. They are believed to have died in the Sherwood Crescent area of Lockerbie, where parts of the plane's fuselage and wings crashed, forming a 30-foot-deep crater. Investigators fear that little or nothing remains of them, the sources said. ``The search is still going on for bodies and it will continue ... (but) it would be quite unrealistic for anyone to have an expectation that we would be able to find all of the victims' bodies,'' said police Superintendent Angus Kennedy. Kennedy said between 80 and 90 percent of the plane's structure had been located and charted on maps, including most of the huge tail section, but only 20 percent had been picked up. Collecting the wreckage is a long process because many pieces must be picked up by helicopter from a huge, partly inaccessible area, he said. T. Allen McArtor, head of the FAA, met with representatives of U.S. airlines operating at Gatwick Airport and called for ``a heightened level of security on all American flights operating out of European and Middle Eastern airports.'' McArtor told airport and security chiefs he wanted to see greater use of screening halls where only selected baggage now is thoroughly searched. The officials agreed but emphasized problems of space and expense. Flight 103 originated in Frankfurt with a Boeing 727, switching to the larger Boeing 747 at London's Heathrow Airport. In London, The Independent newspaper said one of the items found by searchers is a piece of the luggage that belonged to Lebanese student Khalid Jaafar, who news reports have said may have unwittingly carried the bomb aboard. The Independent quoted an unidentified civilian searcher as saying that part of a zippered bag that was recovered contained the 21-year-old student's identity card and a roll of currency ``from a country in the Middle East.'' The bag was ``clearly nowhere near where the bomb exploded,'' the searcher was quoted as saying. Kennedy refused to comment. Jaafar's father, Nazir, who lives in Dearborn, Mich., has denied U.S. and British reports that his son, who lived in Frankfurt, may have been duped by Middle East terrorists into carrying the bomb aboard. Hubert Harth, a spokesman for the Frankfurt prosecutor, said the bomb that destroyed the jet was in the forward luggage compartment, which contained all of the baggage from Frankfurt Airport and some of the baggage from Heathrow. ``That's where the bomb was, but we still don't know whether it got on board the flight in Frankfurt or in London,'' Harth said, noting that the information came from Scotland Yard. An adviser to PLO chief Yasser Arafat said investigators should not expect too much help from the Palestine Liberation Organization in tracking down the bombers. The adviser, Khaled Hassen, said in an interview with Britain's Channel 4 comercial network that FBI director William Sessions was mistaken when he asserted Sunday that Arafat has a ``wealth of information'' to contribute. In Moscow, Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman Vadim Perfiliev said his government was ready to help find those responsible for the crash, but did not give specifics. As search teams continued to hunt for wreckage and victims, police said 126 of the 242 bodies recovered had been released to relatives. In Lockerbie, more than 130 Pan Am employees from around the world were expected to join about 100 relatives of the crash victims at a memorial service Wednesday at Dryfesdale Presbyterian parish church. Les Jardine, spokesman for the Dumfries and Galloway Regional Council, said the 2,500 residents of Lockerbie hope the service will mark the end of the international attention the town has received for the past two weeks and enable them to return slowly to normal life. 
The dollar opened the year's trading at 123.98 yen on the Tokyo foreign exchange market Wednesday, down from its 1988 close of 125.90 yen on Friday. 
Authorities have expelled a Pakistani nuclear physicist suspected of helping his country make a nuclear bomb, the Justice Ministry said Tuesday. Abdul Qadr Khan, 52, was arrested Dec. 24 and put on a plane to Pakistan ``as an undesirable alien'' the same day, according to Ministry spokeswoman Toos Faber. In 1985, a Dutch court sentenced Khan in absentia to four years in prison for stealing confidential papers from a Dutch uranium enrichment plant. However, that verdict was overturned two years later on a legal technicality. Khan, who left the country in 1975, denies the allegations. Mrs. Faber said Khan was put on a list of undesirable aliens despite reversal of his conviction. Khan, who is Dutch-trained and married to a Dutch women, was accused of carrying out the theft while working here in the nuclear industry. He was suspected of stealing information in 1974 from the West European consortium Urenco at its plant in Almelo, Netherlands. After he returned to Pakistan, he worked as chief of a uranium enrichment facility in Kahuta. Pakistan says its nuclear facilities are used only to produce energy, but India and other foreign countries suspect Pakistan of trying to make nuclear weapons. Authorities detained Khan on Dec. 24 on suspicion of carrying forged identity papers during a routine traffic check at the city of Bergen op Zoom, near the Belgian border, Mrs Faber said. Bergen op Zoom is the hometown of his wife, Hanny, the official said. 
Oil from a 231,000-gallon spill off the central Washington coast nearly two weeks ago has drifted more than 100 miles into the Strait of Juan de Fuca separating the state from Vancouver Island. The spill has killed more than 3,200 sea birds, state officials said, with more expected to die despite hand-cleaning by volunteers. The latest bird cleaning station was set up Tuesday at Neah Bay, on the northwest tip of the Olympic Peninsula. For residents of Port Angeles on the southern shore of the strait, the appearance of oil brought to mind the December 1985 spill of 239,000 gallons of Alaska crude into the city's harbor when the a tanker ran aground, the worst oil disaster in Washington's waters. Estimates of birds killed in that disaster ranged as high as 4,000. Oil from the Dec. 22 has been detected as far south as Newport, Ore., and as far north as the coast of British Columbia, a 300-mile stretch. The leak began when a tugboat towing an oil barge punched a hole in the barge in high seas. The hole was plugged and the barge taken to Portland, Ore., for repairs. Damage to the coastline from the oil and the cleanup, including raking up the beaches and the use of helicopters and other machines, will be hard to measure, said Chuck Janda, Olympic National Park's chief ranger. Forty beach-cleaners worked Tuesday on northern wilderness beaches soiled over the weekend when storm waves brought in oil thought to have dissipated at sea, said Doug Zimmer, a spokesman for the state Department of Wildlife. Roughly 5,000 birds have been contaminated by the oil, he said. Volunteers recovered more than 2,600 birds, which are cleaned and kept in holding ponds until natural oils critical to their buoyancy return. But about 800 have died. Volunteers in the Neah Bay area reported seeing flocks of birds unable to fly but resisting capture. A dead, oil-coated seal also was found near the bay, though the cause of its death was unknown. Washed and healthy birds are being shuttled from the biggest bird cleanup center at Ocean Shores, near the site of the spill, to Hood Canal, a saltwater inlet 60 miles inland from the coast where the birds won't meet with more oil, Zimmer said. Thirty cleaned birds were released Monday and Tuesday along Hood Canal, near members of their own species, he said. Last week, 12 birds were released. 
Snow and freezing drizzle fell across the Great Lakes region on Tuesday, causing slippery road conditions, while temperatures in the upper Mississippi Valley dipped to 15 below to 30 below zero with the wind chill factor. Snow accumulated over much of Wisconsin and Minnesota and in northern Indiana and northwest Ohio, falling at the rate of 2 inches an hour at Alpena, Mich., on Tuesday afternoon. Freezing rain caused several multiple car accidents in the Indianapolis area. Marquette and Escanaba, Mich., measured 4 inches of snow, while Houghton Lake, Mich., received 3 inches. Snow advisories were posted in much of northern and central Ohio, western Pennsylvania and the West Virginia Panhandle. A winter storm watch was posted for the mid-Atlantic Coast from Long Island to Delaware in preparation for the approaching low-pressure system. Snowshowers lingered Tuesday afternoon over southern Minnesota and southern Wisconsin, with wind gusts of up to 45 mph blowing snow across the upper Mississippi Valley and upper Great Lakes. Scattered rain was reported from Alabama into the Carolinas, and light rain fell along the northern Pacific Coast. Dense fog settled into the central California valleys Tuesday morning. Winds continued to be strong and gusty on the east side of the northern Rockies. Wind gusts reached 74 mph at Livingston, Mont., and 49 mph at Cody Wyo. Mobile, Ala., reached 77 degrees Tuesday, setting a record temperature for the date. The old record was 76 degrees in 1952. The low in the nation this morning was 13 degrees below zero at Gunnison Colo. Temperatures around the nation at 2 p.m. EST ranged from 2 degrees below zero at Detroit Lakes, Minn., to 85 degrees at Harlingen and Kingsville, Texas. For Wednesday, the National Weather Service forecast widespread rain from the Pacific northwest into the northern Plateau and northern California. Rain and a few thunderstorms will develop across the southern Plateau region with wet snow spreading across parts of northern Arizona. Winds will be gusty at times from the central Appalachians to the mid Atlantic Coast and southern New England. High temperatures will rise into the 40s or 50s across much of the nation. Highs will be in the single digits and teens from the northern Great Lakes into New England, in the 20s and 30s from the northern Plains and upper Mississippi Valley to the lower Great Lakes, the lower Ohio Valley, the central Appalachians and to the mid Atlantic Coast. Highs will be in the 30s across the central intermountain region. Highs will be in the 60s along the southern California coast and from the Rio Grande Valley of Texas into western Oklahoma, southeast Colorado, across Texas and southern Louisiana and to central Florida. Highs will be in the 70s across the southern parts of Texas and southern Florida. 
President Reagan will undergo surgery at Walter Reed Army Hospital in Washington on Saturday for correction of a long-standing contraction of the ring finger of his left hand, his doctor said Tuesday. Col. John Hutton, the Army doctor who is the White House physician, described the procedure as elective surgery and said it should not interrupt the president's normal schedule, except that he will have a bandage on his left hand. Hutton said the president would be admitted to the hospital Friday, the operation would be performed on Saturday and the president is expected to return to the White House on Sunday. He said an axillary block, a form of regional anesthesia numbing the arm, would be used for the operation. He said no general anesthesia is anticipated. The operation is expected to take two to three hours, he said. ``The president's contracture was minimal but present when he took office in 1981, and has been followed over the past eight years,'' Hutton said. ``Within the past year, it has progressed to the degree that surgical therapy is now necessary.'' The condition is known as Dupuytren's Contracture, after Baron Dupuytren, a French surgeon who described it in 1833. The White House described the condition as ``a progressive, usually painless contraction of the digits'' which is common in men over 60. Reagan, 77, last underwent surgery in January, 1987, when he was operated upon for a prostate condition. Reagan's previous operations as president have been performed at Bethesda Naval Hospital. White House spokesman Roman Popadiuk said Walter Reed was chosen because the hand surgeons who will perform the operation are at that hospital. The physicians will be Dr. George Bogumill of Georgetown University, a consultant at Walter Reed; Col. Alan Smith and Maj. Paul Perlik of the Hand Service at Walter Reed, and Hutton. Hutton said the president would rest in his room after the operation and should be ambulatory by afternoon. The surgery is scheduled to begin at 7:30 a.m. EST. The White House distributed a fact sheet from the Hand Surgery Section of the Walter Reed Orthopedic Department saying the condition most commonly affects the ring or little finger or both. The sheet said it affects men up to ten times more frequently than women and the chances of a person contracting it over the age of 60 may be as much as one in five. It said the treatment, when surgery is required, consists of surgical removal of the affected tissue when the first knuckle is contracted, or bent inward, 30 degrees or more, or when the second or third knuckled are affected. It said the operation usually results in full correction at the first knuckle, but often leaves some residual contraction at the second knuckle. After treatment, it said, the patient wears a bulky dresing from the fingers to the upper arm for one to three days. Active motion is encouraged. A smaller dressing is then used. Sutures are removed 10 to 14 days after surgery. It takes about six to eight weeks for the patient to recover the ability to use the affected finger. Dr. Charles Lane, a hand specialist in private practice in Beverly Hills, said the cause of the disease is unknown. He said the disease causes a thickeninging of the gristle under the skin, resulting in limited motion of the fingers. ``It pulls the fingers down so the fingers can't be straightened,'' Lane said. He said this could be particularly troublesome in the case of someone like Reagan who has to shake hands frequently because ``he would be tickling people's palms.'' ``Also, it's hard when you shave and when yhou try to get your hands in your pockets,'' he said. He said the operation is delicate but not particularly risky. When told that Reagan would spend Friday and Saturday nights in the hospital, the doctor commented, ``Medicare would never pay for that. They make us do them all as outpatients. Two nights is probably just a matter of convenience.'' Lane said patients are often required to wear a dynamic, or spring, splint to help straighten the fingers after the operation and sometimes also do exercises as part of their therapy. 
There were 132,976 cases of AIDS reported to the World Health Organization by 177 countries by the end of 1988, according to a WHO survey released Tuesday. The total, which represents all cases ever reported to WHO, is 2.8 percent higher than that of Nov. 30, chiefly due to updated reports from the United States, with 80,538 cases as of Dec. 14, and from other Western countries. Uganda, with the second-highest number of cases, 5,508, has not filed a new report since August. France ranks third with 4,874 cases listed by the end of September. The actual number of cases worldwide is estimated by WHO at more than 350,000. Dr. Jonathan Mann, director of the WHO's global program on AIDS, predicted that during 1989 and 1990, more than 400,000 new cases are expected to occur, with another 600,000 anticipated in the following three years. The WHO estimates at least 5 million people are infected with the human immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS, sharply reducing its previous projections of the spread of the disease. About 20 percent to 30 percent of HIV-infected people develop AIDS within five years, according to WHO. In March 1987, a WHO report said 50 million to 100 million people may be infected by 1991. But a new estimate last month put that projected figure at 6 million to 7 million. Dr. Mann spoke of ``dramatic evidence'' of behavioral change in some high-risk groups, including homosexuals, prostitutes and intravenous drug users. Acquired immune deficiency syndrome is caused by a virus that damages the body's immune system, leaving victims susceptible to infections and cancer. It is spread most often through sexual contact, needles or syringes shared by drug abusers, infected blood or blood products, and from pregnant women to their offspring. 
A computer hacker charged with infiltrating systems in the United States and England, was declared ``a very, very great danger to the community'' Tuesday by a judge who renewed his imprisonment without bail. U.S. District Judge Mariana R. Pfaelzer made her ruling after Kevin David Mitnick, 25, pleaded innocent to computer fraud charges and his attorney urged the judge to release him on bail. Attorney Alan Rubin argued that Mitnick is ``being held incommunicado'' and is being treated more harshly than men charged with violent crimes. ``My client is being portrayed as some sort of Machiavellian figure _ either out of government paranoia ... or some other government agenda I'm not aware of,'' said attorney Alan Rubin. Rubin accused the government of exaggerating the seriousness of the case and suggested that Mitnick be released to his family with a tap placed on his telephone. But the judge, citing Mitnick's previous misdemeanor conviction on a similar computer related crime, rejected that suggestion. ``Isn't it highly likely he'll do it again?'' she asked. Rubin insisted he wouldn't repeat the action. A Mitnick associate who turned him in has told of the young man's genius with computers and his alleged ability to tap into computers operated by the National Security Agency, among others. The super-secret NSA is responsible for electronic eavesdropping, gathering data from U.S. spy satellites and conducting sophisticated signals intelligence. Assistant U.S. Attorney Leon Weidman, said he will file further charges against Mitnick next week. ``We believe he's extremely dangerous and should not be allowed any access to a computer or telephone,'' Weidman said. Mitnick is being held in a maximum-security cell at the federal Metropolitan Detention Center, where he is not allowed to make phone calls unless he is monitored by an administrator. A federal grand jury indicted him Dec. 20 on computer fraud charges. He is accused of unauthorized use of MCI long-distance codes to tap into computers at Leeds University in England and the University of Southern California, and of causing $4 million damage to a Digital Equipment Corp. computer system. Leonard DiCicco, 23, an associate who reported Mitnick to authorities, has described the defendant as ``a big fat slob of a guy who couldn't get through a day without breaking into a computer somewhere.'' ``It's scary to think of the things he's capable of,'' said DiCicco. The 5-11, 240-pound Mitnick, clad in a khaki prison uniform, answered, ``Not guilty,'' twice when asked for his plea to the charges against him. His trial was tentatively set for Feb. 21 but Judge Pfaelzer said that would be changed if a new indictment is filed. ``I have no doubt that he is a very, very great danger to the community,'' she said. ``I also believe he is a flight risk.'' She ordered restrictions on his telephone use to remain in effect. When Rubin objected to Mitnick being housed in a high security area of the prison, Ms. Pfaelzer declared: ``The court thinks high security is entirely appropriate with this defendant.'' Rubin said he believed authorities were reacting to ``technology fear and other reports of computer viruses'' elsewhere in the nation. Mitnick reportedly used the code name ``Condor'' in his electronic activities, taking the name from the 1975 film ``Three Days of the Condor,'' in which Robert Redford played a CIA researcher and telephone expert. DiCicco contends that Mitnick is obsessed with two things _ fast food and computers. ``All he did was eat Fat Burgers, drink Slurpees and work on computers,'' DiCicco said. 
A federal judge has given singer Wayne Newton until Feb. 1 to accept a reduced $5.3 million award in his libel suit against NBC or face the prospect of proving his case again in a new trial. U.S. District Judge Myron Crocker's decision, filed last week in Fresno, Calif., came after attorneys for Newton argued for a new trial solely on damages while NBC attorneys sought a complete rerun of the original 1986 Las Vegas trial, which lasted eight weeks. Crocker said in the ruling that he was ``convinced that the issues of liability and damages are so intertwined that they should be determined by the same jury.'' Newton's attorney, Morton Galane, was not immediately available for comment on what the entertainer would decide to do. Newton won a record $22.8 million verdict against the network when a jury ruled the singer was defamed in a series of NBC broadcasts that linked him to organized crime figures. Crocker, however, later threw out all but $5.3 million of the award, and gave Newton the option of accepting the money or seeking a new trial strictly on damages. Both sides submitted lengthy legal briefs in October in U.S. District Court in Los Angeles, where the case was transferred for a retrial scheduled for May. The Newton-NBC case stems from an Oct. 6, 1980, broadcast entitled ``Wayne Newton and the Law.'' In the report, NBC correspondent Brian Ross reported that Newton had gone to organized crime figure Guido Penosi for help with a problem. Newton argued the report left the impression that his October 1980 purchase of the Aladdin Hotel was linked to organized crime. The hotel has since been sold and is currently owned by Japanese businessman Ginji Yasuda. Galane has suggested he will call as witnesses such luminaries as President Reagan, Frank Sinatra and Lucille Ball to testify in Newton's behalf for assessing damages in a new trial. 
A man who stole a Philadelphia transit bus from a depot early Tuesday took police on a half-hour, fender-bending chase through two states, leaving a police officer and 15 other people injured, authorities said. The chase ended at 7:45 a.m. when an officer fired at the bus and the alleged thief, Glen A. Barhight, 35, of Croydon, rammed the vehicle into a large elm tree in Lower Moreland Township, Police Chief Frank Amabile said. The bus was the second belonging to the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority stolen in the past week. Barhight was scheduled to be arraigned on charges of aggravated assault, recklessly endangering another person, receiving stolen property and causing a catastrophe, authorities said. Amabile said there was no indication he was hit by a bullet, but an unidentified Abington Memorial Hospital spokeswoman said he was in stable condition with a graze wound to his head, abdominal injuries and cuts to his left arm. Middletown officer Leroy Alexander, 39, who was crushed between the bus and a patrol car, was listed in guarded condition with abdominal injuries at St. Mary Hospital in Langhorne, spokeswoman Elle Rudolph said. Authorities said 14 people were injured when the bus hit their cars just blocks before the crash. Six were admitted tohospitals with problems ranging from cuts to neck and back injuries; the rest were treated and discharged. SEPTA spokesman James Whitaker said the bus was stolen from a depot in northeast Philadelphia. Amabile placed the time at 4:30 a.m. to 6:30 a.m. The first report of the stolen bus came shortly before 7 a.m. in the township of Middletown, where Police Chief Frank McKenna, who alerted police departments about the stolen bus, said the bus knocked down a traffic light. At 7:15 a.m., the bus started crossing a bridge into Trenton, N.J., from Morrisville, according to Lower Moreland Detective Sgt. James Cummings. Bridge personnel tried to stop the bus, because it was oversized, but the vehicle continued, damaging overhead signs, Cummings said. It turned around and came back into Pennsylvania on U.S. Route 1, he said. When the bus got bogged down in traffic, police cars pulled in front to try to end the pursuit. McKenna said Alexander, a 16-year officer, got out of his car and approached the bus. As he tried to open the rear doors, the traffic cleared and the bus pulled away, dragging Alexander ``the length of two cars'' and pinning him between the bus and a police car, McKenna said. At least two officers fired at the bus during the chase. The bus continued into Philadelphia and then into Lower Moreland, where it crashed after hitting about 13 cars, authorities said. On Saturday, a SEPTA bus was stolen in Upper Darby and struck a dozen cars in Philadelphia. The driver in that incident escaped. 
A judge ruled Tuesday that Joel Steinberg, accused in the slaying of the 6-year-old girl he illegally adopted, must submit to an examination by a psychiatrist retained by prosecutors. State Supreme Court Justice Harold Rothwax, who is presiding over the murder trial, said he would grant the Manhattan district attorney's request to have Steinberg examined because his lawyers appear to be presenting an insanity defense even though they are not saying so. Steinberg, a 47-year-old disbarred lawyer, is charged with second-degree murder in the November 1987 beating death of Lisa Steinberg, the girl he illegally obtained from an unwed teen-ager and raised as his own. The judge's ruling forces Steinberg to decide whether he will argue that he is not criminally responsible by reason of mental disease or defect. When a defendant claims he is insane and therefore not responsible, the prosecution has the right to examine him to try to disprove that claim. Rothwax left it to lawyers for both sides to work out an exam schedule. The judge said that if the defense does not invoke an insanity defense at any point in the remainder of the trial then the prosecution psychiatrist will not be called and there will be no harm to the defense case. If the defense clearly presents an insanity defense later, then the prosecution will be prepared to rebut the testimony, the judge said. Ira London, one of Steinberg's lawyers, said he will probably not argue insanity and will probably refuse to allow prosecution psychiatrists to examine Steinberg. He said the judge misunderstood the defense position. Rothwax noted that the defense last month asked to be allowed to enter an insanity plea and was turned down with permission to try again. 
Maoist guerrillas killed seven villagers by slitting their throats during a raid, and an anti-rebel death squad wounded this town's Marxist mayor in a bomb attack Tuesday, police said. A column of Shining Path guerrillas swept into the farming hamlet of Occollo, on Ayacucho's western outskirts, late Monday night and ordered villagers to assemble in the central plaza, police said. The rebels then picked out seven men and slit their throats, charging they belonged to a village self-defense patrol organized to resist the Shining Path, the police said. Rebels have executed hundreds of peasants they suspect of being local patrol members since the military organized the groups several years ago in villages across Ayacucho state. Ayacucho, 225 miles southeast of Lima, is the cradle of the Mao-inspired Shining Path. In its eight-year fight, the group has claimed more than 12,000 lives. A placard left by attackers outside the house of Mayor Fermin Azparrent in Ayacucho warned him to leave town within two weeks or face death, police said. They said the threat was signed by the Rodrigo Franco Command. The Franco group surfaced in July when it killed a defense attorney for leftist guerrillas and vowed to rid the country of rebels and influential people it considers soft on subversion. The mayor, a vocal critic of the government's anti-terrorism policies, told The Associated Press he was cut by flying glass but not seriously injured in the early morning bombing at his home. Azparrent, a member of the Marxist coalition the United Left, the second strongest party in Peru's Congress, said the bomb exploded at the front entryway, destroying the door, demolishing furniture and shattering windows and lights. Ayacucho's San Cristobal University, criticized by the right wing as a hotbed of radical thought, also was bombed but there were no injuries and police said there was only minor damage. The Franco group has issued death threats to nearly a dozen journalists, many of whom are known to be strongly anti-guerrilla but also have been harsh critics of Peru's center-left government. Officials have rejected charges that the death squad is linked to the ruling Aprista Party and have said its members will be captured. 
The son of Archbishop Desmond Tutu said Tuesday he engineered his own arrest at an airport to promote an advertising agency he heads. Trevor Tutu made the declaration to reporters after going to court Tuesday first to face charges stemming from the airport incident and then to answer minor traffic violations. ``We're in the business of playing with people's minds,'' Tutu, 32, told reporters at his news conference. He said he tricked police into arresting him mainly ``to tell people that TuMult had arrived.'' He serves as chairman of TuMult, a black-oriented advertising agency formed a few months ago. He said the name was chosen to sound like his last name, which gained international fame in 1984 when his father won the Nobel Peace Prize. Earlier Tuesday, Tutu and a former girlfriend appeared in a suburban magistrate's court to face charges of violating civil aviation laws. The charges relate to an incident over Tutu's luggage Saturday at Johannesburg's Jan Smuts Airport. The case against Tutu and Joan Rhodes was postponed until Feb. 15. But Tutu was taken into custody by Johannesburg police as he left the Kempton Park courthouse, driven to police headquarters, and fined $160 for failing to answer three traffic summonses. He pleaded guilty to operating an unlicensed vehicle and parking twice in a loading zone. At the news conference, Tutu said he and colleagues planned the airport incident as a promotion stunt. Tutu said he changed into dirty, old clothes while heading into Johannesburg on a flight from Swaziland. He said he then placed luggage near some policemen at the airport and told them he was a servant acting on instructions of his white employer. He said the police did nothing until he came back later to remove the bags and told them the parcels could have contained bombs. At that point, he said, many policemen converged, and he was arrested, Tutu said. ``I tied down 5,000 guys,'' Tutu said of security personnel. He repeatedly mocked police, saying at one point: ``They don't know what they're doing.'' Police have warned South Africans not to leave parcels and luggage unattended in public places because of a bombing campaign by anti-government guerrillas. Tutu is the eldest of four children of Desmond Tutu, who leads the Anglican Church in southern Africa. The father won the Nobel Prize for his campaigning against the country's system of racial discrimination. Trevor Tutu said his father did not know in advance of his recent activities but added: ``As long as I'm using peaceful means, he doesn't mind.'' In 1984, Trevor Tutu was held by police for three days before he was cleared of a charge of drunken driving. In 1985, he was briefly detained after arguing with police at a courthouse about the detention of black children. 
A passenger bus ran off a roadside cliff and tumbled 165 feet down a ravine in the Andes mountains, killing 13 travelers and injuring 30, the government newspaper said Tuesday. The crash occurred late Monday night near Huambos, a mountain hamlet 400 miles northeast of Lima, the La Cronica newspaper reported. In preliminary reports, officials blamed the crash on poor driving conditions caused by fog and wet roads, the newspaper said. The privately owned bus was en route from the highland town of Chota to coastal Chiclayo, 120 miles west, La Cronica said. Two weeks ago, a bus crash in the Andes killed 21 passengers. Authorities said accidents in the mountains occur with greater frequency from December to March, due to heavy seasonal rains that worsen conditions on roads already poorly paved or made of dirt and gravel. 
A judge on Tuesday ordered Dartmouth College to lift suspensions against two former editors of the Dartmouth Review, a conservative student newspaper, citing the bias of a disciplinary board member. Grafton County Superior Court Judge Bruce Mohl's ruling did not address First Amendment claims and other broad issues in the students' underlying lawsuit, which he termed ``a massive legal battleground.'' In a state lawsuit and a companion federal action, Review staffers accuse Dartmouth of violating their rights and discriminating against conservatives. The two former editors sought reinstatement while they pursue those lawsuits. Mohl also left the door open to further disciplinary action by the Ivy League school against former Dartmouth Review staffers Christopher Baldwin and John Sutter by a reconstituted disciplinary panel. Baldwin, 21, of Hinsdale, Ill., and Sutter, 22, of St. Louis, were suspended in March for 18 months for their role in a classroom encounter with a black professor of music, William Cole. A third Review staffer involved in the incident has completed his six-month suspension; a fourth served probation. The students, who are white, denied any racial motivation but the incident sparked renewed racial tensions on the Hanover campus. Mohl ruled that disciplinary panel member Albert LaValley's presence on the panel ``was fundamentally unfair'' to the students. LaValley's objectivity was disputed because of a letter he had signed four months before the incident. The letter condemned the off-campus weekly Review for ``slanderous articles'' that ``seriously threatened the principle of academic freedom'' and complained of ``sexist and racist'' characterizations of faculty members. ``No citation is needed to conclude that the letter LaValley signed, and that he testified that he agreed with, demonstrates substantial bias and prejudice on his part against students who write for The Dartmouth Review,'' Mohl wrote. ``Had the content of the letter been known to the (disciplinary board), the court cannot imagine the (board) reaching any conclusion other than that LaValley should not sit on the ... panel.'' The decision noted that LaValley, who was not identified in the decision other than as a panel member, discussed the letter with the disciplinary board chairman the day hearings for the students began. LaValley could not recall details of the letter at the time and said he believed he could be objective. Others on the panel, whose members include students, faculty members and administrators, accepted his judgment, the court wrote. 
A motor launch carrying more than 150 people was reported to have sunk in the central Philippines, with most passengers saved but at least five people dead and 19 missing, the coast guard said Wednesday. Lt. Felix Claro, coast guard operations officer in Iloilo city, said a mayor in Romblon province gave the casualty figures in reporting by radio that the vessel Gem sank Tuesday off Looc Bay, about 150 miles southeast of Manila. Claro said the mayor reported that at least 134 people were rescued. The officer said he sent a rescue team to verify the radio message but bad weather delayed operations. He did not give the mayor's name. 
Sources said writer Andrei Sinyavsky returned to the Soviet Union for the first time in 15 years Tuesday for a reunion with the widow of Yuli Daniel, with whom he stood trial in 1966 on charges of illegally publishing abroad. Sinyavsky and his wife arrived after Irina Uvarova, Daniel's wife, made an appeal to Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze to allow them to come to Moscow, said Western journalists who met Sinyavsky at the airport. Daniel died of a stroke at his home Friday night. He was buried Monday, but Sinyavsky did not get his visa in time to attend the funeral. The trial of Sinyavsky and Daniel 22 years ago was a worldwide sensation and marked the beginning of a long crackdown on dissidents during the years of former Soviet President Leonid I. Brezhnev. The two were arrested about a year after Brezhnev ousted Nikita S. Khrushchev, who had given writers somewhat more freedom after the years of Josef Stalin's repression. Daniel received a sentence of five years in prison and labor camps for publishing his writings abroad. He remained in the Soviet Union after his release and refrained from any dissident activity. Sinyavsky received a seven-year term and emigrated to France after he was released. ``I think they gave me the visas for fear of a big scandal if they refused,'' the journalists quoted Sinyavsky as saying. The journalists, who spoke on condition they not be identified, quoted Sinyavsky as saying he was pleased with improvements in the Soviet press and in cultural life, but that they were not yet irreversible. 
The Sandinista government will not reply to peace proposals advanced by rebel leaders until after President-elect George Bush is inaugurated, Vice President Sergio Ramirez said Tuesday. ``We will wait until he (Bush) decides what to do with the Contras,'' Ramirez said, reiterating the leftist government's longstanding position that the rebels are ``a creature of the United States.'' Ramirez commented after four resistance leaders sent a letter to President Oscar Arias of Costa Rica asking for his help in reopening peace talks with the Sandinistas. Arias is the author of a 1987 peace plan for Central America that calls, in part, for negotiated solutions to civil conflicts in Nicaragua, El Salvador and Guatemala. Leaders of the U.S.-backed rebels, known as Contras, said last week they would submit negotiation proposals to Central American presidents, due to meet in San Salvador on Jan. 15 in a bid to revive the stalled Central American peace process. In the letter to Arias, Contra leaders Adolfo Calero, Enrique Bermudez, Roberto Ferrey and Wilfredo Montalvan proposed that talks begin in Washington on Jan. 25. President Daniel Ortega on Saturday denounced rebel statements and said he would not negotiate with the Contras. He has called on the rebels to lay down arms and accept a government amnesty. Ortega was in Cuba on Tuesday celebrating the 30th anniversary of the Cuban revolution. Ramirez said his government is ready to negotiate with the United States and to continue the peace process. The Sandinistas came to power through a revolution in 1979. They have been challenged by the rebels in a civil war that has gone on for more than seven years and taken more than 50,000 lives. Most of the fighting stopped when a cease-fire was declared in March 1988, but further talks to settle the conflict broke down in September. 
Poland will cut tens of thousands of people from its military and reduce the percentage of national income spent on defense because of decreasing East-West tensions, the defense minister was quoted as saying Tuesday. Gen. Florian Siwicki forecast such money-saving steps as consolidating military academies and officers' schools, cutting the number of reservists called up for active duty, and increasing the number of units whose personnel are reduced in peacetime, according to the state news agency PAP. ``We assume that these changes will bring considerable benefits, running into tens of thousands of full-time jobs, as well as big material and financial savings,'' PAP quoted him as saying. Poland has the second-largest army in the Warsaw Pact military alliance after the Soviet Union. The London-based International Institute for Strategic Studies in 1987 estimated Poland's army as having 394,000 active troops and 491,000 reservists. Siwicki said Poland had reduced the size of its military by 15,000 troops in the past two years, liquidated two mechanized divisions and retired many older planes, tanks and artillery pieces, the news agency reported. The planned $1.9 billion military budget for 1989 represents 3.6 percent of the total national income, compared to 3.8 percent of national income spent on defense in 1988, Siwicki was quoted as saying. Siwicki did not specify the size of the 1988 military budget but said the 1989 budget represented a reduction in real terms from 1988 of 4 percent. That would indicate a 1988 military budget of around $1.98 billion. The minister said Poland generally has spent about 4 percent of its national income on the military but now intends to lower that ratio. ``If peace trends are lasting, they will make it possible for us to ensure national security at a correspondingly lower cost,'' Siwicki was quoted as saying. ``A process of reducing the defense budget is a logical consequence of this.'' 
Teams of federal, state and local inspectors toured a flood-ravaged area Tuesday to assess damage from a dike break that damaged more than 150 homes, an official said. There were no injuries from the dike break, but four bridges were washed out and a number of livestock were killed. By Tuesday, about 80 people, mostly tenants at damaged apartment buildings, still were displaced, said Jerry Lewis, chairman of the Washington County Commission. Four teams, including one from the Federal Emergency Management Agency, were surveying damage to homes, businesses, farms, roads, bridges and sanitation plants, said David Grier of the FEMA regional office in Denver. ``It'll be a few days before final figures are in, and the figures will be influenced by flood insurance and other considerations, including whether people have found place to live or whether they have other unmet needs,'' he said. If FEMA issues a disaster declaration, the federal government could reimburse residents for up to 75 percent of their losses, with the remainder covered by state and local governments. As the teams investigated the damage, many residents complained they were warned either too early or too late of the flood early Sunday. Some 1,500 people were evacuated from along the Virgin River before a wall of water rushed from a 200-foot-wide gap in the dike at Quail Creek Reservoir. ``We could have gotten a lot of stuff out if we had been given a more realistic time,'' said Myron Nelson, a resident of the Riverside Apartments complex south of St. George. ``We got the TV and the sewing machine out but there was a lot more we probably could have taken with us had we known.'' Ruth Ann Basile said the flood swept away her horses, chickens, dogs and 20 cows and demolished fences, chicken coops and alfalfa fields. ``They should have alerted people sooner than they did,'' she said. ``If we had just had notice, we could have moved our livestock to higher ground and saved them.'' The flow from the broken dike was down to a trickle by Monday, power was restored and residents in St. George and its suburbs were cleaning up. Bulldozers were being used Tuesday to build a cofferdam, a small temporary water-tight barrier. Lewis said engineers have begun evaluating the cause of the break. The dike has seeped off and on since 1985, when the reservoir was filled. Gov. Norm Bangerter has declared the county an emergency disaster area, but he underwent knee surgery Tuesday and had not signed the necessary documents, said press secretary Francine Giani. She said the governor was expected to formalize the declaration upon his return to duty, possibly Wednesday. Bangerter has vowed to rebuild the 2,000-foot-long, 50-foot-high dike, which would take an estimated six months. 
The lawyer for torture-murderer Gary Heidnik criticized prison officials Tuesday for not supervising him more closely before his drug overdose, and a prosecutor said he doubted Heidnik wanted to kill himself. Heidnik was ``semi-comatose'' and in serious condition Tuesday at West Penn Hospital, where he was taken from the State Correctional Institution after being found unconscious Sunday in his death row cell, prison officials said. A prison statement Tuesday said Heidnik ``is believed to have stored medications that were prescribed for him by pretending to take them at the designated times.'' A psychiatrist who interviewed Heidnik before his trial said hospital officials told him the medicine was an anti-psychosis drug, Thorazine. Prison spokesman Tom Seiverling refused to identify the drug. Heidnik faces the death sentence for the slayings of two of six women he kept chained in the basement of his Philadelphia row house. His attorney, A. Charles Peruto Jr., said his client should have been under a 24-hour watch because of past suicide attempts. ``They obviously did not check his mouth to make sure he was taking his medication,'' Peruto said. ``He was never off suicide watch in Philadelphia.'' Peruto said Heidnik had a history of trying to commit suicide with stockpiled Thorazine. were unsure how many tablets Heidnik had swallowed, he said, but his client had been getting one tablet daily. ``The ironic thing is now they're going to work on him around the clock so he can regain consciousness so we can execute him,'' Peruto said. Assistant District Attorney Charles Gallagher, who prosecuted Heidnik, said Tuesday he understood from prison officials that Heidnik's condition was not life-threatening. He said Heidnik had feigned suicide attempts in the past. He said Heidnik has used claims of suicide attempts and failures to get better prison conditions. The attempts have succeeded in the past in getting him into hospital settings, instead of the general prison population, he said. Dr. Clancy D. McKenzie, a Philadelphia psychiatrist who spent 110 hours interviewing Heidnik, said West Penn doctors told him Heidnik took an overdose of Thorazine, which he probably had been stockpiling for three months. The 45-year-old self-proclaimed minister was convicted July 1 of murdering two of six women he abducted and kept shackled in a basement torture chamber in his north Philadelphia home. A jury sentenced him to death a day later, and his formal sentencing is scheduled for Feb. 9. Next week, a federal bankruptcy judge is to distribute more than $500,000 in stocks and bonds found in Heidnik's house after he was arrested. 
College students from 19 nations have arrived at Princeton University to match wits in a war of words. The students will begin competing Wednesday in the ninth annual World Universities Debating Championship, a most argumentative forum that pits nearly 250 top speech-makers in what is considered the ``world cup'' of debating. ``This is the largest and most diverse debate tournament ever held,'' said Drew Graham, a Princeton University student who is organizing the event. ``For the first time, we've even got students from Eastern bloc countries. A Polish delegation will participate and the Soviet Union is sending a delegation to observe. We're very excited about it.'' The tournament, sponsored by Princeton University's Whig-Cliosphic Society, North America's oldest debate organization, will conclude with a championship round on Monday. Some 120 teams are represented, including 33 from the United States. A team from Oxford University in Great Britain won last year's championship. The debaters will duel under rules made famous by Great Britain's parliament under a style where ``delivery and wit have a lot of emphasis,'' Graham said. ``They'll debate topics such as whether education is a right or privilege.'' ``You've got to have a convincing style and a persuasive manner,'' said Graham, who is one of 60 judges in the tournament. ``There's no prepared research.'' To some participants, a quick-thinking mind and a lively tongue are key ingredients to a successful debate. ``The concept of `winging it' when you don't know much about the topic is one of the most oft-used expressions,'' said Australian Julian McMahon, 25, of Melbourne University. ``When we need to wing it, we emulate the politician by getting as few ideas as possible to the gallon.'' Present day politicians, however, are not held in as high esteem by the Australians. ``We'd be happy to debate Dan Quayle any time,'' laughed McMahon. Some nations, such as New Guinea, have sent participants for the first time. Wialo Sakatao, 19, of Papua, New Guinea, said his challenge will be debating in English, which is his second language. ``In New Guinea, debating is popular in the schools,'' said Sakatao. ``But culturally, there are a lot of tribal arguments over many things, including politics.'' Suzanne Hagedorn, a spokeswoman for the 300-member Whig-Cliosophic Society at Princeton, said debating in the United States was once viewed ``as college sports are today.'' In Scotland, which will hold next year's championship, debating ``is part of our fabric,'' said David Rennie, 22, a debater from Glasgow University, the only team that has won two championships. ``It's interesting to see how the different countries approach the debates,'' said Rennie. ``The Americans tend to be more analytical, while the Scots are more direct and to the point. The Irish, they're a wee bit more philosophical.'' Staving off defeat can require some fancy brainwork, especially if the debater stumbles, Rennie said. ``You've got to turn it to your advantage if you stumble,'' Rennie said. ``You've got to keep it going. The one thing you can't do is to say, `I'm sorry, I've got nothing left to say.''' U.S. teams participating are: Augsberg College, Bates College, Bucknell University, Columbia University, Cornell University, Emerson College, Fordham University, Furman University, Harvard University, Case Western, Johns Hopkins University, Marist University, Mount Holyoke College, New York University, Oberlin College, Regis High School and Rice University. Also, Sacred Heart University, St. Lawrence University, St. Louis University, Smith College, Stanford University, Swarthmore University, University of Maryland-Baltimore County, University of California at Berkeley, University of California at Los Angeles, University of Michigan, University of Pennsylvania, University of Richmond, Vassar College, Wesleyan University, Williams College, Yale University. 
An air and sea search continued for a fourth day Tuesday for five Canadians and a St. Vincent boat captain reported missing in rough seas off the Caribbean island. The six were reported missing Friday after their 30-foot motorboat failed to return to St. Vincent from a day cruise of the Grenadines island chain nearby, officials said. The boat was last seen in Mayreau, a 1-square-mile island 35 miles south of St. Vincent, and was returning to St. Vincent when it apparently ran into rough weather. High winds and rain halted landings Friday afternoon at the island's small airport. A Mayeau resident who saw the boat leaving said all six people aboard were wearing orange life jackets. Officials identified the six as teacher Frances Eger, 46, her son, Acron, 18, and daughter, Vija, 19, and real-estate agent Bill O'Brien, said to be in his 40s, all of Vancouver; Jonathan Deitcher, 20, of Toronto; and boat captain Danny Sorren, about 30, a St. Vincent native and naturalized U.S. citizen. The Canadians were guests of O'Brien's brother, Michael, a Canadian who manages the Caribbean Sailing Yachts Hotel and Charter Service in Kingstown. The U.S. Coast Guard began a search for the missing boat on Saturday, aided by the coast guards of St. Vincent, Grenada and Trinidad, and five privately owned aircraft. 
The City Council voted Tuesday to require all prospective city employees to take drug tests, then defeated a proposal that would have all council members take the same test voluntarily. Councilman Dozier Smith, who sponsored the drug-testing proposals, said they were needed as a first step for the city to come to grips with drug use among employees. The council voted 12-4 to test prospective employees. Mayor Andrew Young is expected to approve the proposal when he receives it, probably later this week, said spokeswoman Sandra Walker. The proposal is expected to go into effect Tuesday. Any prospective employee who tests positive would be given a second test, and any who failed both tests would not be hired. On a voice vote after five minutes of discussion, the council defeated a motion calling for council members to be tested voluntarily. 
A judge on Tuesday took a weeping 12-year-old girl away from the woman who raised her and gave her to the mother of her biological parents, who ``disappeared'' during the former military regime. A federal appeals court ruled that Susana Siciliano must give up the child. Police took Ms. Siciliano and the girl she adopted, Ximena Vicario, to court Tuesday, where Federal Judge Juan Fegoli gave her to her grandmother after talks lasting more than seven hours with both sides and with psychologists. The girl sobbed ``Let me stay with my mommy, please!'' as she was placed with her grandmother, Darwinia Rosa Monaco de Gallichio.  The incident stemmed from the 1976-83 military dictatorship, when at least 8,960 Argentines were arrested and presumed killed as part of the military's ``dirty war'' against leftist subversion. Ximena's parents _ Juan Carlos Vicario and Stella Maris Gallichio de Vicario _ were arrested in February 1977 and were never seen again. They ``disappeared,'' as Argentines put it. Ximena, then about eight months old, was given to a state orphanage where Ms. Siciliano worked. She took the baby home, renamed her Romina Paola and in 1981, legally adopted her. In 1984, the grandmother finally traced down the girl and began legal proceedings to get her back, supported by the human rights group Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo. Ms. Siciliano wept as she walked from the court Tuesday. Ximena told reporters, ``I'm content to have another grandmother,'' but says she wants her grandmother to visit her at Ms. Siciliano's home. Ms. Siciliano knew Ximena's background from the start, and hid those facts when she applied for adoption, court records show. She faces charges of abduction of a minor and falsification of records. 
The Kremlin troubleshooter for Afghanistan is expected here Wednesday in his search for political arrangements that will enable the Soviets to get all their troops out on schedule in six weeks. Foreign Ministry sources said Yuli Vorontsov would spend four days in Pakistan, meeting with government officials and Afghan insurgent leaders. Vorontsov is both the Soviet Union's first deputy foreign minister and its ambassador to Afghanistan. He met with guerrilla chieftains a month ago in Saudi Arabia, and again in Tehran on Monday and Tuesday. Moslem insurgents began fighting after a communist coup in April 1978 and Soviet forces entered Afghanistan in December 1979, replacing one pro-Moscow regime with another. An estimated 115,000 Soviet soldiers were in the country when the Kremlin signed a U.N.-mediated agreement April 14 to withdraw them. Half the troops were out by Aug. 15, according to U.N. reports, and the rest are to be gone by Feb. 15. The Soviets temporarily suspended their troop pullout in late 1988, complaining that the United States and Pakistan were still arming the guerrillas, who continued fighting. But Islamabad-based Western diplomats said Tuesday the Soviet pullout has begun from Shindad and Herat in western Afghanistan, and they quoted Afghan officials as saying the main Soviet military withdrawal will begin Jan. 15. The diplomats, speaking on condition of anonymity, said an exodus of Soviet civilian advisers from the Afghan capital is going on. At least 5.5 million Afghans have fled their country during a decade of civil war, most of them to Pakistan. The insurgents use border cities and refugee camps as bases and supply points for operations inside Afghanistan. A senior Pakistani diplomat told The Associated Press on Tuesday: ``We have been informed that Vorontsov is bringing a message from the top Soviet leadership for President Ishaq Khan and Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, as Moscow thinks there is too little time left to settle the Afghan problem.'' The Foreign Ministry sources said the Soviet envoy would meet with Ishaq Khan on Thursday and confer with Ms. Bhutto on Saturday. Those meetings are considered important, but the centerpiece of his visit will be sessions Friday with leaders of the seven-party Afghan guerrilla alliance based in Peshawar, Pakistan. Sibghatullah Mojaddidi, new leader of the Peshawar alliance, told a news conference in the border city Tuesday he would meet with Vorontsov this week. The alliance chairmanship rotates among factions every three months, and Mojaddidi took over Jan. 1. One Foreign Ministry official said representatives of guerrillas based in Iran also might join the talks with Vorontsov. Voronstov was in Iran on Tuesday for talks with Iranian officials and the Iran-based Afghan rebels on the future of Aghanistan, Soviet and Iranian media reported. The official Soviet news agency Tass said Vorontsov met Iranian President Ali Khamenei and Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Velayati, and held a separate session with Afghan opposition leaders headed by Mohammad Karim Khalili. In both meetings, Tass said Vorontsov urged that a peace conference of all Afghan political parties and groups be formed soon. About 2 million of the Afghan refugees are in Iran. The Iran-based guerrillas, who are Shiite Moslem, occasionally have been at odds with the Pakistan-based guerrillas, who are Sunni Moslem. At the first talks between Vorontsov and the Pakistan-based insurgents, Dec. 3-5 at Taif, Saudi Arabia, the alliance proposed selection of a council of about 400 members that in turn would choose an interim government. Guerrilla leaders insisted that the Soviets remove the current government before the council was established in Kabul and refused to accept communists in a postwar government. Vorontsov took the demands back to Moscow but the Kremlin has not replied. Pakistani diplomats said Moscow wants the Communist Party represented in Afghanistan's next government. ``This is mainly a face-saving provision,'' one said. ``Such representation will let the Soviets feel they have not pulled out of Afghanistan in humiliation or ... dumped Najib.'' Najib is president in the current government. Leaders of the alliance have criticized the Soviets since the December meetings in Saudi Arabia. ``They feel unhappy because Vorontsov met former King Zahir Shah and offered him an opportunity to return and play a role in the future government,'' the diplomat said. ``A majority of the resistence leaders are opposed to Zahir Shah because of his Western lifestyle while he ruled Afghanistan ... and the fact he did not partricipate'' in the war civil war. Zahir Shah was overthrown in 1973 and lives in Italy. 
The 101st Congress opens with the nation's legislature still firmly in Democratic control but with important changes in the leadership that will confront such crucial issues as the federal budget deficit, the environment, health care and ethics. New and re-elected members of the House and Senate were being sworn in today, and then the two chambers were set to carry out organizational chores for two days. Among them: a joint session on Wednesday to count the electoral votes for president. Congress will then adjourn until Jan. 20 although hearings could start before then on some of President-elect Bush's nominations. No bills will be considered until later in the month, but plenty will be talked about as lawmakers await Bush's legislative proposals. Possibly the most controversial decision members will have to make early in the session is whether to approve a pay raise for themselves. A presidential commission has recommended a 50 percent increase, and many lawmakers contend their jobs make it difficult to live on the $89,500 base salary. 
The Energy Department is proposing an $81 billion, 20-year program to clean up and modernize the nation's troubled nuclear weapons production complex. ``The cost of modernization and environmental restoration will require a significant increase in funding for the next two decades,'' said an Energy Department report for delivery to Congress. The $81 billion total includes $52 billion to modernize outdated facilities, some of which are more than 30 years old, while $29 billion would go toward efforts to deal with radioactive and chemical contamination at many sites throughout the weapons complex. The long-range plan would involve building new facilities in South Carolina and Idaho as well as phasing out weapons production activities in Washington state, Colorado and Ohio. 
The White House says representatives of the United States and the Palestine Liberation Organization have discussed possible PLO assistance in investigating the airliner bombing over Scotland that took 270 lives. President Reagan says he would be happy to receive any information that PLO chairman Yasser Arafat might offer to help solve the mystery of Pan American Flight 103, which crash Dec. 21 en route from London to New York. Arafat has condemned the bombing. An administration official, speaking on condition he not be identified, said the United States stopped short of formally requesting PLO assistance. 
Outgoing U.S. Ambassador Vernon A. Walters says U.N. peacemaking successes last year _ ending wars in Afghanistan, the Iran-Iraq war and Angola _ are unprecedented in the annals of the world body. These successes and warming U.S.-Soviet relations have made the United Nations ``a better place for the United States to do business,'' Walters said in a farewell interview. The former deputy head of the Central Intelligence Agency said the U.S. view of the world body, once hostile and disdainful, has changed to appreciation. ``If properly handled,'' Walters said, ``the U.N. can be advantageous in promoting our goals of peace, prosperity and freedom.'' ``If it didn't exist, it would have to be invented.'' 
Fidel Castro's revolution has eradicated much U.S. influence from Cuba, but certain vestiges defy 30 years of Communist rule. Thousands of pre-revolutionary era American cars, for example, still negotiate the roads. Washington imposed a trade embargo in 1960. Cubans hang on to their rundown Fords and Chevies because later model Russian-made Ladas are only available to a limited number of Cubans. Castro says widespread use of private cars is a luxury Cuba cannot afford. Thus, antiquated as they are, U.S.-made cars are still prized possessions. The driver of a beat-up 1948 Chevrolet said he turned down an offer of about $10,000 for his car. U.S. cars a decade older routinely go for twice that price, equivalent to about five years pay for the average worker. 
In making their wedding plans, Rhonda Hufford and Todd Kellermann chose musicians, pink dresses and gray tuxedos. And they were tested for AIDS under a year-old law some officials say isn't worth the cost. The nation's only premarital AIDS testing law may not be a law much longer, primarily because, like the Kellermanns, the overwhelming majority of those tested have shown no signs of the AIDS virus. Illinois' mandatory testing program took effect Jan. 1, 1988. But only 23 of the 150,000 people tested in the first 11 months were found to be infected with the virus, the state Department of Public Health said. That's about one in 6,500 tested. 
Nicaraguan women, many of whom fought on the battlefield to help bring about the Sandinista revolution, are back in combat demanding the new society change its macho attitude toward females. In the past year, a growing women's movement has obtained equal rights in divorce and had a satirical newspaper suspended for presenting women as sexual objects. It's not a battle won easily in Latin America, where women are expected to remain subservient to males, stay at home and raise children. This, despite the fact that many women must work outside the home to survive. Women's lives are further burdened by primitive conditions: shanty homes, lack of potable water or plumbing, wood-burning stoves. These day-to-day struggles, coupled with the lack of education and sexist attitudes, make the job of the women's movement more difficult. When asked about women's rights, a peasant woman in the rural south asked, ``What is that?'' ``We are trying to change the level of consciousness,'' said Lea Guido, head of the Luisa Amanda Espinoza Association of Nicaraguan Women. Ms. Guido's group is linked to the ruling Sandinista National Liberation Front and takes its name from one of the martyrs in the fight to depose Anastasio Somoza, who was ousted in 1979. ``Participation by women in politics is a new phenomenon,'' she said. ``It started because everyone was against the dictator, and that caused everyone to fight. It was the first victory for women.'' During the war, women served as guerrilla fighters or messengers and ran safe houses, organized demonstrations, set up contacts and sought the release of prisoners. Dora Maria Tellez was a guerrilla commander. She is now the minister of health. Doris Maria Tijerino was a clandestine member of the Sandinista Front. She is now the nation's chief of police. Rosario Murillo, the nation's first lady, worked secretly with the guerrillas. Rosa Pasos, a lieutenant colonel in the army and spokeswoman for the Defense Ministry, acted as a go-between in clandestine contacts. Many women, especially in the capital, wear olive green uniforms for their administrative jobs with the army and Interior Ministry. The government even provides maternity uniforms. Thousands of civilian women underwent arms training for militia work, some in the use of Soviet-made anti-aircraft guns. They are barred from combat but serve behind the lines as cooks and in administrative jobs. ``Women here traditionally were not just housewives. They always worked,'' Ms. Guido said. ``But they used to be exploited by the men and not paid fairly.'' Most women work to add to the family income, and just finding scarce goods and budgeting with 20,000 percent inflation can be a full-time job. The official Sandinista newspaper Barricada says 70 percent of the pickers for coffee, the nation's main export crop, are women. Almost 49 percent of the state's administrative positions are held by women, but none is among the nine-member directorate that runs the Sandinista Front. ``We're working on it,'' Ms. Guido said. ``In a country so poor, so backward, it's not easy, but there's a political will.'' The Sandinista party has vowed to ``abolish the discrimination that women have suffered with respect to men; it will establish economic, political and cultural equality between women and men.'' But old ideas are hard to change. ``A woman's job is to take care of the family. What is this about rights? They have rights,'' said a man at a vegetable market. Several other men agreed. ``Having women in battle creates problems, jealousy, you know what I mean,'' a young male army lieutenant said. Ms. Guido's organization opened a legal affairs office in 1983 to deal with abuses, separations, and much-needed sex education. ``The legal office has had to overcome women's traditional timidness and fear in publicly discussing problems that have long been considered exclusively private and better left unexamined,'' said Envio, a magazine published by the Central American Institute, a Sandinista think tank. Ms. Guido points out that education is an important part of the movement. ``Many women in the rural regions are not married. They have too many children, it's part of the machismo,'' she said. ``Before the triumph, we didn't even have day care,'' Guido said. ``It's still insufficient, but it's enormous in comparison.'' 
Today is Sunday, Jan. 8, the eighth day of 1989. There are 357 days left in the year. Today's Highlight in History: On Jan. 8, 1935, rock 'n' legend Elvis Presley was born in Tupelo, Miss. On this date: In 1642, astronomer Galileo died in Arcetri, Italy. In 1815, U.S. forces led by Gen. Andrew Jackson defeated the British in the Battle of New Orleans, the closing engagement of the War of 1812. In 1918, President Woodrow Wilson outlined his 14 points for peace after World War I. In 1959, Charles De Gaulle was inaugurated as president of France's Fifth Republic. In 1964, President Lyndon B. Johnson declared a ``War on Poverty.'' In 1965, the Star of India and other stolen gems were returned to the American Museum of Natural History in New York. In 1973, secret peace talks between the United States and North Vietnam resumed near Paris. In 1975, Judge John J. Sirica ordered the release of Watergate figures John W. Dean III, Herbert W. Kalmbach and Jeb Stuart Magruder from prison. In 1976, Chou En-lai, premier of China since the communists took power in 1949, died in Beijing at age 78. In 1982, American Telephone &amp; Telegraph settled the Justice Department's antitrust lawsuit against it by agreeing to divest itself of the 22 Bell System companies. In 1987, the Dow Jones industrial average closed above the 2,000 level for the first time, ending the day at 2,002.25. Ten years ago: In Ireland's worst domestic disaster, 50 people died when the French supertanker Betelgeuse exploded as it was discharging crude oil at the Gulf Oil terminal in Bantry Bay. Five years ago: A U.S. Marine was killed in an ambush near the British Embassy compound in Beirut when he and his comrades were fired upon by unidentified assailants. One year ago: An Arizona state grand jury indicted Gov. Evan Mecham and his brother, Willard, on charges of concealing a campaign loan. Both were later acquitted. Today's Birthdays: Actress Butterfly McQueen is 78. Actor-director Jose Ferrer is 77. Actor-comedian Larry Storch is 66. Actor Ron Moody is 65. Comedian Soupy Sales is 63. ABC newsman Sander Vanocur is 61. CBS newsman Charles Osgood is 56. Singer Shirley Bassey is 52. Actress Yvette Mimieux is 50. Rock singer David Bowie is 42. Thought for Today: ``How small it's all.'' _ James Joyce, Irish author and poet (1882-1941). 
Today is Monday, Jan. 9, the ninth day of 1989. There are 356 days left in the year. Today's Highlight in History: On Jan. 9, 1793, what's generally regarded as the first successful balloon flight in the United States took place as Frenchman Jean Pierre Blanchard traveled between Philadelphia and Woodbury, N.J. On this date: In 1788, Connecticut became the fifth state to ratify the Constitution. In 1861, Mississippi seceded from the Union. In 1942, the Joint Chiefs of Staff was created. In 1945, American soldiers led by Gen. Douglas MacArthur invaded Luzon in the Philippines during World War II. In 1964, anti-U.S. rioting broke out in the Panama Canal Zone, resulting in the deaths of 21 Panamanians and three U.S. soldiers. In 1968, the Surveyor 7 space probe made a soft landing on the moon, marking the end of the American series of unmanned explorations of the lunar surface. In 1972, reclusive billionaire Howard Hughes, speaking by telephone from the Bahamas to reporters in Hollywood, said a purported biography of him by Clifford Irving was a fake. In 1977, the Oakland Raiders defeated the Minnesota Vikings, 32-14, in Super Bowl XI, played in Pasadena, Calif. In 1983, hundreds of residents of the Falkland Islands cheered British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher as she began a surprise tour of the South Atlantic colony, which Britain had wrested back from Argentina seven months earlier. Ten years ago: By a 6-3 vote, the Supreme Court struck down a Pennsylvania law requiring a doctor performing an abortion to try to preserve the life of a potentially viable fetus. Five years ago: A federal judge sentenced former Environmental Protection Agency official Rita M. Lavelle to six months in prison for her conviction on charges of lying to Congress. She served five months of her sentence in 1985. One year ago: The Iran-Contra affair continued to dog Vice President George Bush's presidential campaign, with Republican rival Bob Dole comparing Bush to former Vice President Spiro T. Agnew for criticizing news coverage of the issue. Today's Birthdays: Former President Nixon is 76. Football Hall-of-Famer Bart Starr is 55. Actor Bob Denver is 54. Folk singer Joan Baez is 48. Actress Susannah York is 48. Singer Crystal Gayle is 38. Thought for Today: ``Nostalgia is a seductive liar.'' _ George W. Ball, American lawyer and government official. 
Today is Tuesday, Jan. 10, the 10th day of 1989. There are 355 days left in the year. Today's Highlight in History: On Jan. 10, 1776, American revolutionary Thomas Paine published his influential pamphlet ``Common Sense.'' In his call for American independence from England, Paine wrote, ``Everything that is right or reasonable pleads for separation.'' On this date: In 1861, Florida seceded from the Union. In 1870, John D. Rockefeller incorporated Standard Oil. In 1920, the League of Nations was established as the Treaty of Versailles went into effect. In 1928, the Soviet Union ordered the exile of Leon Trotsky. In 1946, the first General Assembly of the United Nations convened in London. In 1946, the first manmade contact with the moon was made as radar signals were bounced off the lunar surface. In 1957, Harold Macmillan became prime minister of Britain, following the resignation of Anthony Eden. In 1978, the Soviet Union launched two cosmonauts aboard a Soyuz capsule for a rendezvous with the Salyut 6 space laboratory where two other cosmonauts had been living for a month. Ten years ago: Billy Carter, brother of President Carter, set off a controversy during a tour of Atlanta with a visiting Libyan delegation by making allegedly anti-Semitic remarks. Five years ago: The United States and the Vatican established full diplomatic relations for the first time in more than a century, although some presidents had, since 1939, appointed personal representatives to the Holy See. One year ago: Republican presidential candidate Bob Dole charged on ABC that the circulation of a negative article about him by the George Bush campaign was similar to the derailment of Democrat Joseph Biden's campaign by supporters of Michael Dukakis. Today's Birthdays: Singer Gisele MacKenzie is 62. Singer Johnnie Ray is 62. Opera singer Sherrill Milnes is 54. Baseball Hall of Famer Willie McCovey is 51. Singer Frank Sinatra Jr. is 45. Singer Rod Stewart is 44. Singer Pat Benatar is 36. Thought for Today: ``History must speak for itself. A historian is content if he has been able to shed more light.'' _ William L. Shirer, American author and journalist. 
Today is Wednesday, Jan. 11, the 10 day of 1989. There are 354 days left in the year. Today's Highlight in History: On Jan. 11, 1935, aviator Amelia Earhart began a trip from Honolulu to Oakland, Calif., that would make her the first woman to fly solo across the Pacific Ocean. On this date: In 1757, the first secretary of the Treasury, Alexander Hamilton, was born in the West Indies. In 1805, the Michigan Territory was created. In 1861, Alabama seceded from the Union. In 1913, the first sedan-type automobile, a Hudson, went on display at the 13th Automobile Show in New York. In 1943, the United States and Britain signed treaties relinquishing extraterritorial rights in China. In 1964, Surgeon General Luther Terry issued the first government report saying smoking may be hazardous to one's health. In 1977, France set off an international uproar by releasing Abu Daoud, a Palestinian suspected of involvement in the massacre of Israeli athletes at the 1972 Munich Olympics. In 1978, two Soviet cosmonauts aboard the Soyuz 27 capsule linked up with the Salyut 6 orbiting space station, where the Soyuz 26 capsule was already docked, making it the first time three spacecraft were brought together in orbit. Ten years ago: Billy Carter, brother of President Carter, denied remarks he had made while touring Georgia with a group of Libyans were anti-Semitic, and said, ``This trip is not being conducted to be an embarrassment to my brother.'' Five years ago: Chief Warrant Officer Jeffry C. Schwab, a U.S. Army pilot, was killed by Sandinista fire as his helicopter was shot down along the Nicaraguan-Honduran border. One year ago: The Soviet Union announced it would participate in the Seoul Summer Olympics, clearing the way for the first U.S.-Soviet showdown at the Summer Games in 12 years, following the U.S.-led boycott of 1980 and the Soviet-led boycott of 1984. Today's Birthdays: Actress-director Eva Le Gallienne is 90. Former NBC President Grant Tinker is 63. Producer David L. Wolper is 61. Actor Rod Taylor is 60. Country singer Naomi Judd is 43. Golfer Ben Crenshaw is 37. Thought for Today: ``Children are remarkable for their intelligence and ardor, for their curiosity, their intolerance of shams, the clarity and ruthlessness of their vision.'' _ Aldous Huxley, English author and critic (1894-1963). 
Today is Thursday, Jan. 12, the 12th day of 1989. There are 353 days left in the year. Today's Highlight in History: On Jan. 12, 1945, during World War II, German forces in Belgium retreated in the Battle of the Bulge. On this date: In 1773, the first public museum in America was established, in Charleston, S.C. In 1915, the House of Representatives rejected a proposal to give women the right to vote. In 1932, Mrs. Hattie W. Caraway became the first woman elected to the Senate. In 1944, British Prime Minister Winston Churchill and French Gen. Charles de Gaulle began a two-day wartime conference in Marrakesh, Morocco. In 1945, aircraft from U.S. Task Force 38 sank about 40 Japanese ships off Indochina. In 1966, President Lyndon B. Johnson said in his State of the Union address that the United States should stay in South Vietnam until communist aggression there ended. In 1971, the innovative situation comedy ``All in the Family'' premiered on CBS television. In 1986, the shuttle Columbia blasted off with a crew that included Rep. Bill Nelson, D-Fla., and the first Hispanic-American in space, Dr. Franklin R. Chang-Diaz. In 1987, Anglican Church envoy Terry Waite arrived in Lebanon on his latest mission to win the release of hostages, a journey that would result in his own disappearance. Ten years ago: The State Department, fearing a possible military coup in Iran, issued an appeal to the Iranian military, saying a seizure of power would inhibit an ``orderly and constructive approach'' to the establishment of stability. Five years ago: A business-oriented efficiency panel chaired by J. Peter Grace issued its report on deficits which said federal spending could be slashed by $424.4 billion over three years. One year ago: Willie Stargell, a 21-year slugger with the Pittsburgh Pirates, was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown, N.Y., in his first year of eligibility. Today's Birthdays: Journalist Martin Agronsky is 74. Singer Ray Price is 63. The ``Amazing Kreskin'' is 54. Actress Kirstie Alley is 34. Thought for Today: ``Being very rich as far as I am concerned is having a margin. The margin is being able to give.'' _ May Sarton, American author and poet. 
Today is Friday, Jan. 13, the 13th day of 1989. There are 352 days left in the year. Today's Highlight in History: On Jan. 13, 1982, an Air Florida 737 taking off in a snowstorm crashed into the 14th Street Bridge in Washington, D.C., and fell into the Potomac River, killing 78 people. On this date: In 1733, James Oglethorpe and some 130 English colonists arrived at Charleston, S.C., to settle in present-day Georgia. In 1864, composer Stephen Foster died in a New York hospital. In 1898, Emile Zola's famous defense of Capt. Alfred Dreyfus was published in Paris. In 1906, the first advertisement for a radio, a Telimco selling for $7.50, appeared in Scientific American. In 1941, novelist James Joyce died in Zurich, Switzerland. In 1962, television comedian Ernie Kovacs died in a car crash in west Los Angeles. In 1966, Robert C. Weaver became the first black Cabinet member when he was appointed secretary of Housing and Urban Development by President Lyndon B. Johnson. In 1978, former Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, who had been in the forefront of American politics for more than three decades, died at his home in Waverly, Minn., at age 66. In 1987, West German police arrested Mohammed Ali Hamadi, a suspect in the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jetliner. Ten years ago: The government of Iranian Prime Minister Shapour Bakhtiar announced the formation of a nine-member regency council that would carry out the duties of the shah once he left the country. Five years ago: A federal jury in Joplin, Mo., awarded television anchorwoman Christine Craft $325,000 in the retrial of her fraud case against her former employers at KMBC-TV in Kansas City. However, a higher court later threw out the award. One year ago: The Supreme Court ruled, 5-3, that public school officials had broad powers to censor school newspapers, school plays and other ``school-sponsored expressive activities.'' Today's Birthdays: Actor Robert Stack is 70. Hollywood columnist Army Archerd is 70. Actress-singer-dancer Gwen Verdon is 64. Actress Frances Sternhagen is 59. Actor-director Charles Nelson Reilly is 58. Thought for Today: ``Avoid cliches like the plague.'' _ Anonymous. 
Today is Saturday, Jan. 14, the 14th day of 1989. There are 351 days left in the year. Today's Highlight in History: On Jan. 14, 1784, the United States ratified the peace treaty with England that ended the Revolutionary War. On this date: In 1639, the first constitution of Connecticut, known as the ``Fundamental Orders,'' was adopted at a meeting in Hartford. In 1742, English astronomer Edmond Halley, who observed the comet that now bears his name, died at the age of 85. In 1898, the Rev. Charles L. Dodgson, better known as author Lewis Carroll, died less than two weeks before his 66th birthday. In 1914, the Ford Motor Co. greatly improved its assembly-line operation by employing an endless chain to pull each chassis along. In 1943, during World War II, President Franklin D. Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill began a conference in Casablanca. In 1952, NBC's ``Today'' show premiered, featuring Dave Garroway as host, with Jack Lescoulie and newscaster Jim Fleming. In 1964, in her first public statement since the assassination of her husband, Jacqueline Kennedy appeared on television to thank the 800,000 people who had sent her messages of sympathy. In 1969, 25 crew members of the U.S. aircraft carrier Enterprise were killed when an explosion ripped through the ship during maneuvers off Hawaii. In 1978, the body of former Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey lay in state at the Capitol, one day after his death. Former President Nixon arrived to pay tribute on his first visit to Washington since he resigned in 1974. Ten years ago: During a visit to Atlanta, President Carter called on Congress to make the birthday of slain civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr. a national holiday. Five years ago: After addressing an audience of diplomats at the Vatican, Pope John Paul II greeted the envoys individually, including William A. Wilson, the new U.S. Ambassador-designate. One year ago: The U.N. Security Council voted 14-0, with the United States abstaining, in favor of a resolution calling on Israel to stop deporting Palestinians and to allow those already expelled to return home. Today's Birthdays: Movie producer Hal Roach is 97. CBS commentator Andy Rooney is 70. Former CBS newsman George Herman is 69. Actor-author Tom Tryon is 63. Civil rights activist Julian Bond is 49. Actress Faye Dunaway is 48. Actor Marjoe Gortner is 45. Thought for Today: ``Talent is like money; you don't have to have some to talk about it.'' _ Jules Renard, French educator and author (1864-1910). 
Snowy winter scenes may evoke nostalgia for some folks, but to those in charge of clearing the driveway and sidewalks snow can loom as a back-wrenching menace. Health officials report hundreds of heart attacks every year as Americans begin wielding shovels in the cold. And strained muscles and wrenched backs sometimes can reach epidemic proportions. For many people, buying a snow-throwing machine is the answer. These machines can be a big help for people who can afford them and who are cautious about keeping fingers and feet away from the moving parts. But for most, the traditional snow shovel remains the tool of choice, or at least of necessity. The International Chiropractors Association, whose members treat many of those strains and sprains that occur in snow shoveling, have compiled some suggestions to help lessen the potential for injury. Lifting a heaping shovel of snow without bending the knees can subject the spine to severe stress, the chiropractors warn. The snow may weigh only 10 or 15 pounds, but holding it out from the body increases the pressure on the back by up to 15 times that amount. The answer, of course, is to bend from the knees, not the waist, when lifting. That's a lesson learned quickly by people who must lift and carry loads constantly _ such as warehousemen and mothers _ but people who only do so in winter need a reminder. In addition, other causes of shoveling-related pain and injury include simply trying to lift and throw too much snow at one time, twisting at the waist and overexertion. This extra work causes severe stress on the heart and lungs, a burden made worse by working in frigid air. People who have serious spinal, lung or heart conditions or who are out of shape should simply not shovel snow, the chiropractors stress. Hire a neighborhood youngster to do the work, call a plowing service or ask friends or relatives for help. Folks who do plan to shovel need to begin with some gentle warm up exercises, rather that just jumping into the effort. And dress warmly, wearing long underwear to protect and warm the back and other muscles. Where possible, the chiropractors suggest pushing, rather than lifting, the snow. And deposit it nearby rather than straining muscles by trying to throw it over a large area. Try to use the arms, legs, feet and thighs in a coordinated movement in moving snow, and change sides from time to time to avoid straining the muscles on one side of the body. Rest frequently and don't shovel in extremely cold weather. Snow-throwing machines are becoming a more and more popular alternative for removal of the white stuff. They can save the back, but they chew up a remarkable number of fingers of careless users, according to the federal Consumer Product Safety Commission. Here are that agency's suggestions for safer snow-thrower use: _Keep hands and feet away from all moving parts. _Stop the engine by removing the key, spark plug or power cord whenever leaving the operator position to make adjustments, remove debris of whatever. _Never put a hand in the discharge chute or near the auger or collector to remove sticks or other materials _ stop the machine and use a trowel, long stick or other object to clear blockages. _Never leave a running snow thrower unattended. _Never fill the fuel tank of gasoline engines indoors or while the machine is hot or running. _Always be aware of the position of the power cord of electric machines. 
 EDITOR'S NOTE _ It's an emotional movement that is picking up momentum and sometimes turning violent. Animal rights groups are becoming more militant and scoring some successes. Even the respected Humane Society of the United States has taken on the very symbol of consumerism, American Express. 

ROCKVILLE, Md. _ The Humane Society of the United States is urging people to cut up their American Express cards because the credit institution mailed a fur coat catalog announcing: ``Fur _ Because winter is long and life is short.'' ``Follow your heart. Drop your American Express,'' the Washington-based Humane Society told its 830,000 members. That is but one more confrontation in a burgeoning animal rights, animal welfare and animal liberation movement that has been gathering strength across the nation. It is by no means monolithic or even united: The majority would not agree with some of the direct action resulting in burned buildings, theft of records and research animals, and death threats. There are large differences about philosophy and tactics. Many, for example, are unprepared to espouse vegetarianism, while others go so far as to feed a meatless diet to their dogs and cats to spare the suffering of a farm animal. It also has closed down some research projects, caused one company to drop its cosmetics line, and improved conditions for some research animals. Consider the following: _More than 2,000 protesters, led by Bob Barker, walked up Manhattan's Fifth Avenue the day after Thanksgiving _ ``Fur Free Friday.'' There were smaller demonstrations in 66 other American cities. _A research scientist at New York University's prestigious Cornell Medical College made research history when she or the university, or both, yielded to demonstrations and a letter-writing campaign and returned a $530,000 grant to the National Institute of Drug Abuse for a study of barbituate withdrawal in cats. _In England, a few days before Christmas, the Animal Liberation Front claimed responsibility for firebomb attacks on five of Britain's leading department stores, causing millions of dollars of damage in retaliation for selling fur. Dingles, the largest store in Plymouth, was gutted. _President-elect George Bush drew flack for hunting quail on a vacation in Texas. _Police in Norwalk, Conn., are holding animal rights activist Fran Stephanie Trutt, 33, of Queens, N.Y., on $500,000 bail as she awaits trial on charges of attempted murder and possession of pipe bombs. Trutt was arrested on Nov. 11 outside the United States Surgical Corp., a firm that experiments with dogs and has been a frequent target of demonstrators. _In December, ``Bloom County,'' a political comic strip, ran a week of satire on testing rabbits for cosmetics. _And in Huntington, N.Y., on Long Island, a tray of vegetarian dog and cat biscuits, Wow-Bow and Wow-Meow, are baked by an entrepreneurial activist. The radical side of the movement dates back to the anti-vivisectionism of Victorian England, but interest was rekindled by a 1978 book, ``Animal Liberation,'' by Australian philosopher Peter Singer. ``At last we're starting to look like a movement, but I think animal rights is in its early stages,'' says Ingrid Newkirk, chief strategist and director of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA), the most radical of an estimated 3,000 to 7,000 groups involved in animal welfare. A PETA spokeswoman estimates that 10 million Americans are involved and guesses that the operating budgets of the myriad groups come to about $50 million. That's not counting the money held in endowments by the established giants, who tend to be less militant. While businessmen and scientists say they are worried, activists claim they have never hurt a human nor an animal. Alex Pacheco, a co-founder of PETA, says arson, property destruction, burglary or theft are ``acceptable crimes when they directly alleviate the pain and suffering of an animal.'' The same goes for sit-ins, disruptions at stockholder meetings in attempts to pass resolutions to ban product testing on animals. Animal rights people say the experiments are the real crime and that 40 percent of all research animals are used for cosmetic and product testing, often as insurance against a theoretical lawsuit, not as safety measures. ``Do we really need the 48th brand of oven cleaner?'' Newkirk asks. The blitz against wearing fur is the most visible campaign. There are ads atop taxis, on billboards, in subways and buses. Celebrities such as Rue McClanahan and Loretta Swit have participated. Even Princess Di was commended for her refusal to wear fur. The fur industry tries to keep the activists off the air. Richard Parsons, executive director of the Fur Retailers Information Council, says furriers have been asked not to give interviews because they tend to ``shoot themselves in the foot.'' Like the time one told a reporter that all American furs are farm-raised. Not true. ``We can't threaten to pull our ads, because that's how we sell our furs,'' Parsons says. ``But we're big advertisers and sometimes we get a pretty good response. Sometimes we can keep them off the air. We try. ``We don't debate them. We don't dignify them. We don't need to defend the use of fur. It's a matter of personal freedom. This is still a capitalistic society, and it is supposed to be a tolerant one.'' Sales have not been affected, Parsons says, although the industry is looking to increase the international levy at auction houses to increase its war chest to combat the anti-fur forces. ``The American fur industry has had locks jammed, arson, bomb threats and windows smashed,'' Parsons says. ``Giving this movement credibility gives in to more violence.'' Dan Mathews, a 24-year-old PETA member in charge of the anti-fur campaign, says, ``The fur industry will be the first domino to fall. We are not asking you to change your life, just give up cruelty.'' Besides the furriers, the cosmetic industry, research scientists, and producers of livestock, eggs, chickens, and milk _ ``factory farmers'' as the activists call them _ are under attack. ``So what if we put a few businesses under,'' Mathews says. ``The slave traders lost an industry, too.'' The anti-vivisectionist faction believes that man has evolved to a point where he can live without any animal products _ meat, milk, leather, fur, wool, etc. They feel that neither the cosmetic industry nor medical researchers have the right to experiment on animals; that zoos, rodeos, race tracks, even the household pet is an exploitation of the animal kingdom. ``We are not saying animals have the same rights as man,'' says George Cave of Trans-Species Unlimited. ``Sometimes, we have to make choices.'' 
Cave, a former professor of philosophy, exempts American Indians and Eskimos, whose survival is dependent on the hunting of game. The movement is marked by a hyperbolic rhetoric reminiscent of the '60s. Some activists call themselves freedom fighters for animals. Newkirk is happy to reiterate a statement some others wish she had never said in the first place. ``I can't even remember it exactly,'' says British-born Newkirk, ``but I stand by it l00 percent. What I said was a pig is a boy is a dog is a rat in that they are all sentient beings, they are all capable of suffering. That is indisputable.'' The various groups are not above squabbling, especially over funding. Cave says the Humane Society of the United States, which has an annual budget of $9 million, ``has a stranglehold on the funds that is totally unethical. Its president, John Hoyt, is paid $139,000 a year. The Massachusetts Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals has a fortune sitting idle in investments. They could wipe out the pet overpopulation in one year if they would use some of that money.'' The MSPCA, founded in 1839, has an endowment of $42 million and spent $15 million last year supporting three veterinarian hospitals, nine shelters and various educational projects. The Humane Society doesn't support some of the statements of the radicals, and deplores the violence. ``We like to be taken seriously when we go to the Hill,'' says a Humane Society spokeswoman. ``We don't like to be seen as frothing at the mouth.'' Cave, who lives on a $10,000 salary, part of his group's total budget of $350,000, led the Cornell campaign. He calls it a landmark in that the challenge was not about sloppy laboratory conditions, but the very nature of the research. He maintained that barbituate addiction is a complex human problem and that it was inappropriate to expose cats _ or any animal _ to the horrors of withdrawal, a self-inflicted condition in humans. Cave is now attacking a glue-sniffing experiment using monkeys at New York University Hospital. In nice weather, Trans-Species has 14 tables out every weekend on New York City streets explaining its philosophy. The biomedical research community has reacted by forming a Washington-based educational and lobbying group. ``We're not talking here about little old ladies in blue hair,'' says Frankie Trull, president of the Foundation for Biomedical Research. ``We have heard of over 50 death threats. The research community is so unprepared for the animal rights movement. First of all, they have jobs and they don't have time to hang out at shopping centers with signs. ``It is costing millions in increased security, replacing animals that were stolen and buildings that were torched. It is no laughing matter.'' The research scientist at Cornell, Dr. Michiko Okamoto, refuses to talk to reporters. Her colleagues say she was shocked by the developments. Dr. Michael E. DeBakey, a cardiovascular surgeon who became a household name, has emerged as one spokesman for the researchers. Now 80, but working daily from 4 a.m. till midnight, DeBakey says he occasionally gets death threats. He sees the animal rights movement as one with great emotional appeal, but one that is not telling the whole story. ``These people are intimidating a lot of people,'' DeBakey says. ``If you want to become a Jehovah's Witness and refuse blood from another person, I have no argument. I don't agree with it, but I respect your right to do it. What I object to here is the attempt to enforce this view on others. ``I have yet to see a patient who refused treatment from research gained from animals. Do these people plan on turning down such treatment if they need it?'' DeBakey says his surgical breakthroughs, which saved thousands of lives, resulted from experimentation on dogs. ``Almost everything in the cardiovascular field was developed through animal research. You can't use cells or cell cultures or computers.'' The surgeon says animal activists ``are not improving the conditions of animals used in research, They are pricing it out of the market. Twelve states have now passed laws prohibiting the use of pound animals. Yet the taxpayer spends $600 million a year caring for pound animals and putting them to sleep. ``The activists have great political strength and slick organizations. They say alternative methods can be used. They are wrong.'' DeBakey worries about the Cornell decision. ``It is disturbing to see an institution of higher learning cave in,'' DeBakey says. ``The integrity of that academic institution is eroded.'' Medical scientists point to the great strides made using animal models. Everything from polio vaccine to treatments for such diseases as diabetes, cancer, and heart disease have benefited from research on animals. The activists insist the same advances could have been made using different kinds of research. Dr. Frederick King, director of the Yerkes Primate Center at Emory University in Atlanta, also a target of death threats, is eager to speak out. Researchers at his institution are injecting chimpanzees with the deadly AIDS virus (So far it has not jumped their immune barrier, but King says that does not mean it will not with a longer incubation). The animals rights militants say that is not necessary since there are thousands of dying human victims who would gladly allow themselves to be experimented upon. ``Forget the ethical questions,'' Newkirk says. ``It's bad science. They are retarding the AIDS research by using animals.'' King dismisses that argument. He says it's yet another case of non-scientists throwing in their non-scientific opinion. ``My question is where have all the moderates gone?'' King says. ``Even Jane Goodall, who came here about a year ago, has turned to their side. She's a one-agenda person, fanatically attached to chimps. ``The moderates all seem to have gone into the woodwork.'' 

A vegetarian lunch is served every day by The People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals. PETA, as it is called, likes to describe itself as a grass-roots organization. It does have access to a large network of people it can mobilize for a specific cause. However, it is also a centralized operation with computers, direct mail solicitation, an aerobics class at 6 p.m. and a parking lot filled with ``Meat is Dead'' and ``Liberate Lab Animals'' bumper stickers. It says its average contribution from its 300,000 members is $20 and there are no big angels. It is armed with a 10,000 square-foot warehouse, bright leadership, 65 employees and a $5 million budget. PETA is often the clearinghouse when crimes such as arson or property theft occur in the battle against abuse of animals. They get the word from the underground groups _ Animal Liberation Front, True Friends, Human Bondage, and others. ``We know our phones are tapped and we entertain the FBI frequently,'' says Carol Burnett, 36, the public relations director. Is PETA, in fact, the Animal Liberation Front, or does it know who the ALF members might be? ``We would never consider discussing the identity of anyone who is talking too much,'' says executive director Ingrid Newkirk, who has been arrested perhaps a dozen times but has yet to spend a night in jail. ``We have one page of company rules, but it's not like you're joining the army or entering a religious cult. We have a voluntary ban on smoking and ask employees not to bring in McDonald's burgers. ``We ask people not to wear animal products to work, but we don't run around and inspect people's apparel like the Marines. We hope eventually people will get rid of it, but a lot of people just coming to work here still own something made from an animal.'' There are warnings not to leave anything exposed on your desk that is not ready for public consumption. PETA is compartmentalized into research and investigations, education, cosmetics, a ``Whistleblower Hotline,'' and under the Freedom of Information Act, it constantly writes in for reports on publicly funded projects. An educational team of three _ ``Animal Rights 101'' _ flies out just about every weekend to train local groups in how to picket and become effective in their community. A dozen ``companion animals'' accompany employees to work each day and all of the dogs are vegetarians. Some wander through the halls, others are in offices. One is behind a closed door with his picture and a caption that says ``Make My Day.'' But that's a joke. It's a friendly dog. Posters are everywhere. One shows rabbits being blinded ``not in the name of science but in the name of a new shampoo.'' There are pictures of cats with electrodes in their heads, cute young white foxes in cages waiting to become fur coats. ``If you liked pulling the wings off flies as a kid,'' one sign says, ``you may be cut out for a career in animal experimentation.'' The Foundation for Biomedical Research has recently entered the poster war. One shows a little girl in a hospital bed surrounded by stuffed animals. The caption says it's the animals you don't see that saved her life. PETA says it doesn't advocate violence but wouldn't be surprised if more incidents occur. ``If anyone brings on this violence, it's those who commit the obscenities inside the labs,'' says Alex Pacheco, its founder. ``If anyone is responsible for bombs going off, it's the National Institutes of Health. I'm surprised there is not more violence. `Activists are trying to get laws enforced. I work mostly with congressmen and I find it just outrageously frustrating. Here we have government agencies lying to the U.S. Congress, lying to the public and the courts are not enforcing the existing laws against cruelty and nothing substantive has been passed in a decade.'' PETA publishes lists of companies that use animals in their research and those that do not. ``What we must make people realize is that they, as a consumer, run the world,'' Newkirk says. ``Good intentions don't mean a thing if you continue to use the product.'' 
 EDITOR'S NOTE _ It was a sure sign that Cajun culture has gone global when crawfish etouffee and file gumbo showed up on the menu at last summer's Moscow summit. Now busloads of foreign tourists, led by the French, are venturing deep into Louisiana's bayou country to sample a hot and spicy lifestyle in the rough. 

Hunched over his accordion in the shade of a live oak tree, Lennis Romero was letting his ethnic pride show. ``Cher, it don't surprise me one tam bit that Cajun food is a big, yeah, in London, Holland and Russia,'' he says. ``The rest of the world just been a 'ti slow in catching up with the good things in life.'' Lennis and his brother, Ophe, a virtuoso on the 'ti fer, or triangle, had just stomped out ``Jambalaya'' for some ``foreign French'' tourists who arrived on the banks of Bayou Teche in a bus marked ``un voyage au vrai pays des Acadiens,'' a trip to the real Cajun country. Me oh, my oh, Cajun culture has busted out of the bayou and gone global. Suddenly last summer, crawfish etouffee and file gumbo were on the menu at the summit in Moscow. Amsterdam's hottest new restaurant is Riekje Sluizer's Cajun Louisiana Kitchen, ``geopend voor lunch.'' London has two Cajun-style restaurants and liberal doses of sauce piquant are spicing up traditionally bland British cuisine at such posh nosheries as Wilton's and the Savoy Grill. Now busloads of European tourists, led by the French, are venturing deep into the bayous where before World War II paved roads seldom penetrated. As Ophe conceded, there was a 'ti language problem at first. The Romero brothers speak quaint French that like the meandering bayou has been bent out of shape in the last two centuries. But once the visitors from Paris and Lyons figured out that 'ti was Cajun for petit and that an alligator was neither un caiman nor un crocodile, they were able to communicate their desire to sample ``soupe de cocodrie.'' In St. Martinville, the spiritual capital of Cajun-land, the tour group posed for photos around the statue of ``Evangeline,'' the heroine of Longfellow's epic about the British expulsion of French settlers from Acadia, or Nova Scotia, in 1755. Then in the old Indian cemetery, they saw the grave of Emmeline Labiche, whose real-life separation from her lover inspired the poem. Like Americans cramming into the Crazy Horse Saloon in Paris, the French contingent braved the overflow crowd at Mulate's, the Cajun nightclub in Breaux Bridge, for a fais do-do, literally ``make go to sleep,'' the Saturday night dance named for the tiny room where small children dozed while their parents two-stepped until dawn. Cajun music, like Cajun cooking, is echoing around the world. Bayou artists such as fiddler Michael Doucet and pianist Zachary Richard have rabid fans in Paris, Montreal, Quebec, Martinique, San Francisco and New York's Greenwich Village. Don Montoucet's Cajun combo had the comrades jumping when Chef John Folse from Lafitte's Landing in Donaldsonville set up a Cajun restaurant at the Moscow World Trade Center at the summit in June. If Paul Prudhomme had shown up that night at Mulate's, he would have been mobbed like a young Charles Boyer for autographs by both the locals and the French pilgrims on the trail of what their culture has brought forth on this continent. Prudhomme, the first American chef to be awarded the Merite Agricole by the French government, is proprietor of K-Paul's Louisiana Kitchen in New Orleans, a culinary superstar on TV, radio and videotapes, and the author of cookbooks that have sold more than 600,000 in hardback. He is also the author of such insights into Cajun culture as: ``An authentic Cajun is one who anticipates the start of the crawfish season as much as his wedding night.'' ``Good Cajun cooking doesn't taste country; it tastes grandma.'' ``If you don't hover between pleasure and pain when you eat it, chances are you haven't made your sauce piquant hot enough.'' Prudhomme popularized the ``blackening'' method of sealing in the flavor of meat and fish with intense heat, as if cooked over an open fire. Its ubiquitous popularity has produced such menu aberrations as blackened meatloaf and blackened omeletes and has made the lowly redfish, once snubbed in haute cuisine, an endangered species in Texas and Louisiana. Some months ago, undercover agents from the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department mounted a sting operation to foil a ring of commercial fishermen and food wholesalers dealing in illegally caught redfish. ``Dining out these days you don't know if that blackened menu special is the chef's favorite or his latest failure,'' laughs Joe Cahn, who presides over the New Orleans School of Cooking which daily instructs nearly 100 students and was the finishing school for Andre Numan, Amsterdam's Cajun chef. Cajun cooking has been around since the earliest exiles from Nova Scotia found love at first bite of alligator tail meat, but its delights took a while catching on beyond the swamps of the Atchafalaya. When Fannie Merritt Farmer collected America's best recipes for her Boston Cooking School cookbook in 1896, the word Cajun didn't make the index. Even today, Antoine's in New Orleans, founded in 1840, doesn't mention the word Cajun in its extensive menu, although ``Creole'' has a half-dozen listings from ``gombo (sic) creole'' to ``poulet a la creole.'' Bernard Guste, the great-great-grandson of founder Antoine Alciatore, admits however to being ``a bit more heavy-handed with the pepper pot to please tourists who expect Louisiana cooking to be hot, real hot, which was never the creole style.'' Prudhomme points out that ``as Louisiana food has grown in popularity throughout the country, the distinction between Cajun and Creole has almost vanished.'' In history, the distinction is clearer. Creoles are descended from aristocratic families who fled the terrors of the French revolutions, sometimes with their chefs, dressmakers and dancing masters. They intermarried with Louisiana's Spanish settlers, whose cooking pots bubbled with spices and condiments from the Aztecs, Incas and the Caribbean. Black cooks on the plantations added another dimension, like okra and gumbo, both African words. Creole culture was cavalier, gallant, refined; its cuisine elegant, subtle, rich in sauces. Cajuns, a corruption of ``archadia,'' the name given to Canada's maritime provinces by the explorer Verrazano on first sighting their virgin forests, were victims of one of this continent's worst human rights atrocities. 
Originally from Normandy, Brittany and Picardy, they were deported from Nova Scotia, which France lost to England in the War of Spanish Succession. The year of Le Grand Derangement was l755, and D-day was Sept. 5, when entire villages were summoned to their churches to hear King George II's proclamation confiscating their land, homes and cattle and exiling them along the Atlantic seaboard. Soldiers hurried them down to the waiting boats, sometimes separating husbands from wives, parents from children and parting lovers as in the tale Hawthorne told to Longfellow. Their tragedy fell just short of genocide. The British commander, Lord Jeffrey Amherst, who got a liberal arts college named for him, was all for it. In a letter to a Col. Bouquet, he urged: ``You will do well to try to spread smallpox by means of blankets and by every other means which might help exterminate that abominable race.'' Mostly trappers, fishermen and farmers, the exiles settled into Louisiana's swamplands where their hardy, food-loving descendants seldom ventured beyond the range of their pirogues and pickup trucks until 1947 when the first oil rigs loomed over the marshes. Their cuisine, culled from the woods, bayous, tiny gardens and barnyard animals too old to produce, called for slow cooking and high octane sauces to tenderize briskets of squirrel, wild rabbit, alligator and senile sows. Even down to this generation, as both Prudhomme and Cahn recall, Cajuns seldom went to the store, even more rarely to a restaurant. ``We grew virtually everything we ate,'' says Prudhomme, who grew up the youngest of 13 children on a farm near Opelousas. ``If a chicken didn't lay or a rooster couldn't fertilize eggs or a mother pig was too old to have babies, we killed them for food for the family.'' Cahn points out that ``sauce piquant was a necessary camouflage when gourmandizing on 'possum, muskrat and nutria.'' It is doubtful whether many yuppies hovering over their Cuisinarts in quest of authentic Cajun fare could bring themselves to ``trim away any and all hair'' in preparing a 12-pound hog's head for ``fromage de tete de cochon'' _head cheese _ or remove ``the glands located on each shoulder and behind the knees'' of squirrel and game rabbit as prescribed in the Prudhomme Family Cookbook. As for real back-bayou cooking, Prudhomme regrets ``there are almost no sources for purchasing fresh pig's blood'' to make red boudin, Cajun sausage, and admits he ``couldn't sell food cooked in pork lard in my restaurant.'' The five flags fluttering from the columned porch of the Presbytere, or priests' house, in St. Martinville chronicle the course of Cajun culture, from the rule of French Bourbon kings in 1756, to the Spanish in 1762, Napoleon's First Republic in 1800, Jefferson's purchase of Louisiana States in 1803 and a Confederate government during the Civil War. Just down the road a piece bubble the vats of two of the most prodigious purveyors of the Cajun napalm known as hot pepper sauce. The peppers called tabasco _ from the Spanish word for damp earth _ have been grown in Louisiana since an unknown soldier back from the Mexican War gave some dried peppers to Edmund McIlhenny, who planted the seeds in his wife's garden on Avery Island. One war later, trying to salvage his plantation ravished by Union troops, he bottled and brought to market a batch of hot sauce. Now the family owned McIlhenny Company, with annual sales of nearly $12 million, exports the incendiary elements of the Bloody Mary to 100 countries and goes beyond Avery Island's still thriving tabasco patch to pick peppers from Mexico, Honduras, Venezuela, Colombia and the Dominican Republic. In nearby New Iberia, B.F. Trappey's Sons have been marketing a variety of hot sauces, pickled okra, candied yams, redbeans and other Cajun staples for 90 years. ``The Arab countries are our best overseas market for pepper sauce,'' says Jack Blenderman from behind the president's desk at the Trappey plant. ``At lunch, they'll empty a three-ounce bottle on a bit of bread and cheese. The Japanese are also big importers of our 55-gallon drums.'' Like bringing red hot coals to Newcastle, Trappey's now ships its smoldering sauces to Nova Scotia, where natives deprived of the Louisiana experience have perpetrated a bland diet. In the pepper sauce business, hotness is measured by the Scoville Heat Index, a sort of intestinal Btu scale that ranks the relatively hot tabasco, jalapeno and cayenne peppers in the 30,000 range, far behind the tiny Chinese pepper, which festers above the 100,000 mark. To handle the heat on Trappey's pepper picking assembly line, workers wear special gloves and are warned not to rub their eyes. The craze for Cajun culture has seemingly endless manifestations. Cajun humorist Justin Wilson's cooking show is now aired in bizarre bayou-busted English on 284 public TV stations. ``Belizaire the Cajun'' is emblazoned on movie marquees, and for mystery fans author Daniel Woodrell chronicles the cases of Cajun cop Rene Slade. Cajun gumbo mixes, crab boils and other delicacies are available by mail order from Boudin King, Chef Chauvin, Frey of Louisiana, Tony Chachere, Cajun Magic, which is a Paul Prudhomme enterprise, and an ever-growing list of dealers. Now there is a Cajun beer, Cajun cola, Cajun potato chips, Cajun popcorn, ``Cajun Mary'' cocktail mix, Cajun pickles (with the label upside down in keeping with Justin Wilson's self-deprecating brand of Cajun humor), ``Cajun Sweet Smoke Pecan Shells,'' even a Cajun Kosher Cookbook. Aggressive marketing has brought the ``Four Foot Shelf'' of Cajun spices to many supermarkets across the country. To preserve the language, Msgr. Jules Daigle, an 88-year-old retired priest in Welsh, La. compiled a 600-page Cajun Dictionary that was accepted by the French Academy as a scholarly work. It was the monsignor's thesis that, although deeply rooted in French, Cajun evolved into a separate language over the span of two centuries. At the time of his dictionary's publication, he cited the example of ``a French priest who came to St. Martinville some years ago and announced from the pulpit that a `foire,' the French word for bazaar, would be held in the parish next week. The congregation fell apart laughing. In Cajun, `foire' had come to mean diarrhea.'' Chef Cahn credits food writers and restaurant critics with helping heat up the Cajun craze. ``They're like fashion writers in setting new trends. When I was working in Los Angeles, one restaurant went from nouvelle cuisine to Mexican to sushi to Cajun in a four-year period. Same chef. Same owner. Same location. When you're hot, you're hot, and right now Cajun is hot every which way.'' 
 EDITOR'S NOTE _ What do the people in southern Louisiana have in common with the people in northern Louisiana? Very little, beyond the same color license plates. But two women from opposite ends of the state recently set out to try to bridge a cultural gap between the heavily protestant North and the Cajun Catholic South through a youth exchange program. 

Rachel Thompson had never tasted shrimp in her native Louisiana, which is famous for its seafood, and Ronnie Emonet had never heard the wind moan through the piney hills of his own state. Both are 16 and represent the best hope for dismantling a wall of mistrust built generations ago by two clashing cultures, says Carole Andrepont of Opelousas, who turned a joke into a serious experiment that worked. Andrepont, a member of the Louisiana Tourism Board who has been active in international youth exchange programs for years, jokingly told a friend one day, ``If you want to have a real cultural exchange, have folks from north Louisiana come to south Louisiana. It's like two different countries.'' An almost visible line across the center of Louisiana separates the staid upstate Protestants from the Catholic Cajuns, who make time for work around a busy schedule of consuming the full cup of life. The descendants of the exiles from Nova Scotia make up a third of the state's population and those of different ancestry living in south Louisiana have absorbed the laid-back lifestyle of the Cajuns. Former Gov. Edwin Edwards, the first French-speaking Catholic elected to the state's highest office this century, says the division is more a perception than anything else, but ``a perception can be real.'' ``The barrier exists in the minds of those who have not had the opportunity to visit one end of the state or the other,'' he says. ``But, invariably when they do, they come away with an amazement of how much in common they have.'' ``The barrier is exaggerated but it's there,'' adds Gov. Buddy Roemer, whose family plantation is not far from the Arkansas border in north Louisiana. ``A real factor has been a lack of quality transportation. It's hard to get from upstate Shreveport to New Orleans. In fact, it's easier to get from Shreveport to Dallas.'' Edwards and Roemer agree that an exchange program aimed at youths can eventually erase the perception. The idea for the exchange program gnawed at Andrepont and finally she talked with Linda Graham, her Ruston counterpart at a tourism meeting in Baton Rouge. ``I told her I had an idea about two cities having an exchange program and the more we looked at it, the more we liked it,'' she says. ``We talked to our mayors, school officials and civic leaders. Now, we've done it.'' In a recently ended two-week program, about 20 Ruston high school students spent a week in Opelousas and an equal number of the south Louisiana students stayed in Ruston. Host families provided homes and meals, treating their guests like their own kids, Andrepont says. The mayors and civic leaders visited each other's municipalities and, like the kids, discovered that even with the cultural differences, people are just folks and get different views of what they see, depending on personalities. ``The people are more free, more open down here,'' says Rachel, who attends Ruston High School. ``Up north, we're very polite, but down here... ``I called my mom and said I was staying here another two weeks. She just laughed.'' ``I like Ruston better than here,'' says Telameckus Anderson, a 16-year-old junior at Opelousas High School. ``They're so nice. The hills are beautiful.'' ``The family I stayed with made me feel like we were related,'' says Emonet, a junior at Opelousas Catholic. Asked if they laughed at his Cajun accent, Emonet said, ``The girls thought it was cute. I laughed at their drawls. We laughed with each other.'' Graham says she learned something important from her visit to south Louisiana: ``I need to go home and loosen up a bit. We're more conservative in Ruston and we are organized. I find myself regimented to the point where I get a little bit irritated when everything doesn't go just like clockwork. ``I learned to relax. I need to come down here about once a month.'' Andrepont, meanwhile, says Cajuns can learn from the other lifestyles, maybe find a middle ground. ``Everything we do is almost overdone,'' she says. ``When we eat, it's a lot and the best. If it's seasoned, it's highly seasoned. People who drink, they drink.'' Graham and Andrepont say the two cities are going to conduct such programs each year and encourage other communities to do the same thing. ``I think this is going to be a state program,'' Andrepont says. ``We've got Church Point interested in finding a north Louisiana city for an exchange program. The governor is interested. We need to end the division in this state. The 40 youngsters in this program don't have the old attitude anymore. It works.'' Roemer, the governor, says, ``This is the first of several such programs that will happen over the next year. One of the issues in my campaign was the need for all of the state to pull together.'' 
 EDITOR'S NOTE _ Whether the Khmer Rouge communist guerrillas have changed their murderous ways has become a critical issue with the emerging possibility of a negotiated settlement of the decade-old Cambodian war. Here's a report from an AP reporter who traveled the Thai-Cambodian border, interviewing government officials and fugitives from refugee camps run by the Khmer Rouge. 

Khmer Rouge communist guerrillas are holding tens of thousands of Cambodian refugees virtual prisoners in camps in Thailand to serve a war machine bent on reseizing Cambodia, international aid officials say. Some refugees have escaped to tell the story, people like Mom Sokhon, a teen-age girl. Mom Sokhon survived four years under a Khmer Rouge regime that slaughtered six of her relatives and hundreds of thousands of other people in Cambodia. After invading Vietnamese forces ousted the regime, she headed to refugee camps in Thailand seeking haven from the war. But Mom Sokhon wound up in the Khmer Rouge-controlled camp of Huay Chan, and there, she said, the horror began again. The guerrillas forced the 15-year-old girl to toil all day making punji, bamboo spears for impaling enemy soldiers. Hauling punishing loads of punji, rice and B-67 anti-tank rounds, she had to make regular treks through heavily mined mountain passes from the camp to guerrilla bases inside Cambodia. Often on the journey, at times a month long, two or three women had their legs blown off by mines or were shot dead in firefights with the Vietnamese, she says. ``If anyone refused to join the transport team, she would be punished with no food and sent to an underground prison,'' she says. After five years at Huay Chan, Mom Sokhon fled in November to this refugee camp in eastern Surin province controlled by the non-communist guerrillas of Prince Nodorom Sihanouk. She fears the Khmer Rouge will hunt her down. Other Cambodian guerrilla groups and Thai security personnel also have frequently abused refugees in the camps along the Cambodian frontier, but the Khmer Rouge is different. A senior official experienced with rebel movements in Africa and the Middle East says that even in the ruthless world of guerrilla warfare ``it's an unusual feature'' to use children as military porters. ``The disregard for the sick and the disabled is extreme,'' he says. ``There's a kind of totalitarianism I don't see elsewhere.'' Aid officials say hundreds, perhaps thousands, of refugees have died of malaria, tuberculosis and other diseases because the Khmer Rouge refused to treat them properly or would not allow them to see foreign doctors because they would be ``polluted'' by them. Another official, also speaking anonymously, said the people being held in the Khmer Rouge camps ``hardly smile at you, never greet you. They are afraid. In the other camps, the children run up and talk to you. This never happens in a Khmer Rouge camp. I think they are systematically educating the parents to tell the children not to talk to foreigners.'' Concern over Khmer Rouge abuses has sharpened with the guerrillas' recent relocation of thousands of refugees out of two United Nations-assisted camps. Some 7,000 refugees were moved from Ta Luan camp to a border area where they came under heavy shelling in November. Many refugees were believed hurt but the guerrillas have refused to allow aid officials access to them. The Khmer Rouge has denied all charges of abuse. Or Hy, an administrator at its showcase camp of Site B, said the people were moving and portering voluntarily and added that ``all Khmer (Cambodians) should fight back the Vietnamese.'' When the Khmer Rouge ruled Cambodia in 1975-78, they attempted to create a new agrarian society with purges, torture, and mass relocations of people from the cities to rural slave labor camps. It destroyed religion, culture and history to bring Cambodia back to ``year zero'' and held the people under the fearful grip of ``angka'' _ the organization. Vietnam's invasion in late 1978 drove the Chinese-armed Khmer Rouge to the Thai-Cambodian border, where it set up base camps. Tens of thousands of civilians under Khmer Rouge control were driven into Thailand by the devastating Vietnamese offensive of 1985. In the few camps where aid workers have access, the Khmer Rouge seems to have abandoned the mass killings. But it maintains its militaristic and xenphobic control over virtually every aspect of people's lives. Marriage must be approved by camp authorities. Religious practice is banned. Most men wear Chinese military uniforms. In some camps, people cannot walk outside their own section. 
Western officials say the same brutal, shadowy leaders of 1975-78 now run the refugee camps _ Pol Pot, Ta Mok, Son Sen, Ieng Sary and others. Refugees who escape rarely report having seen killings in the camps. Officials say little physical force is needed because the guerrillas control through their fearsome reputation and by denying the refugees all contact with the outside world. But one official cautioned that unknown atrocities may be committed in the military-run camps where foreigners are barred. These camps, including satellite villages around the United Nations-aided camps, hold thousands of civilians and are supplied by China and overseen by Task Force 838, the Thai military secret service aiding the Khmer Rouge. One official who has interviewed dozens of escapees said, ``People disappear in the middle of the night, sometimes with their families, and that's all. Some come back; some don't.'' The Khmer Rouge last year boldly executed two soldiers inside Site B, where it has allowed a Buddhist temple, free markets and elections to show the world it has embraced capitalism and democracy. It is the only Khmer Rouge camp news reporters can visit. One victim, Moeun Noeun, 30, left his unit without permission and went to Site B in April to celebrate the Cambodian New Year with his family. His widow, Rom Yon, said they were sleeping in their bamboo hut when the guerrillas shouted in the darkness. ``They asked if my husband was inside or not, and they came in and shot him,'' she said. ``They shot him here, took him outside and shot him again.'' The Khmer Rouge has allowed the U.N. Border Relief Operation to provide food and other assistance to 60,000 refugees at four camps that are supposed to house only civilians: Site B, Borai, Ta Luan, and O'Trao. In May, the U.N. agency ended aid to Huay Chan because authorities there defied all attempts to monitor its use. There and elsewhere, some of the food appears to have been siphoned off for the guerrillas' use. One official heard lots of shooting when he visited O'Trao, in Sisaket province, a few months ago. He saw a huge Chinese military truck loaded with anti-tank mines, topped with U.N.-donated canned fish. Fifteen heavily armed men and four women with backpacks jogged past, saying they were ``going to fight the Vietnamese.'' Even in the U.N.-aided camps, few refugees have been allowed outside the camps for emergency medical treatment and many of those have been children already too sick to be saved. Wounded soldiers are never evacuated for fear they will defect, aid officials say. Refugees must get permission from camp authorities even to go to foreign-run clinics inside the U.N.-aided camps. Only a limited number are granted permission and many of them have no apparent illnesses, said one doctor who called the camps ``Potemkin villages: You never see the people whom you should see. You see an outer village and you think you are there but you are not really there.'' Near O'Trao, aid officials in June stumbled upon a village of several hundred handicapped people who were believed to have been separated from the others because they were no longer of any use to the Khmer Rouge. Refugees say the camps are governed by a strict vertical hierarchy with many amenities of life depending on one's personal relationship with the privileged top cadres. The cadres hold regular indoctrination sessions and send errant refugees to the military camps for re-education or punishment. Chea Cha, 52, says he and his family spent their time at a camp near Ta Luan portering or attending day-long classes on ``how to fight the Vietnamese or carry weapons, nothing else.'' Those who refused were jailed with their ankles chained together, he says, and many came out emaciated or injured. Chea Cha recently fled to the Sok Sann camp run by the non-communist Khmer People's National Liberation Front. Officials say most refugees would leave the Khmer Rouge camps if they could. In the first 10 months of 1988, 415 people fled to Site B and Sok Sann. Niem Chouleng, the Sok Sann administrator, said a Khmer Rouge official in a military uniform has twice visited him and asked that the refugees be returned. ``It seemed to be a kind of warning,'' Chouleng said, adding that he has not complied. 
 EDITOR'S NOTE _ In a small coastal town in rural southeast Georgia, you used to get the impression that anything destined to happen there happened long ago. That was before the Navy started building a $1.7 billion base for 10 Trident submarines, which begin arriving this month with their nuclear arsenals. St. Marys is unlikely ever to be the same again. 

Just across the tracks from the antebellum charm of historic St. Marys, where old oaks drip Spanish moss, a new nuclear submarine base is changing the face of the countryside with shopping malls and low-cost housing. The Kings Bay Submarine Base, to be home to the Trident subs, means stability, money and lots of jobs in this area on the southeastern tip of Georgia, just north of Jacksonville, Fla. But the boom also is bringing urban-style headaches to rural Camden County. The base, under construction for a decade, will add more than 22,000 people to the population of Camden County, which had only about 13,000 in 1980. Planners are worried about schools, crime, water and sewer systems, libraries, fire protection and recreational facilities. The county had no movie theater until recently. Now a six-theater cinema complex has opened in a shopping center and another is probable for a center being built down the road. The county's landfill, projected to last up to 40 years, was used up in 10 because of the base-related boom. From 1980 to 1988, school enrollment in the area increased 54 percent. Projections show that in 1995, enrollment will be 173 percent above the 1980 level. Backers of the base say the Navy is trying hard to be a good neighbor. Even so, says Roger Alderman of the Kings Bay Impact Coordinating Committee, ``The degree that it affects a small area, especially one such as Camden County, is unimaginable.'' The first Trident submarine was to arrive at the $1.7 billion base on Jan. 14, welcomed in an invitation-only ceremony. Eventually the base will house 10 Trident subs, each carrying 24 missiles packing eight nuclear warheads per missile. Each warhead is 35 times more powerful than the atom bomb dropped on Hiroshima, Japan, in 1945. Each submarine will have more atomic destructive capacity than most nuclear powers, but if the people of St. Marys are nervous about that, it is subdued. The few protests held at the base have not been locally organized. Over the centuries _ up to now _ residents of St. Marys have preserved its charm with a minimum of tackiness. The Spanish settled the community in 1566 and stayed 120 years. Aaron Burr came to town in 1804 after killing Alexander Hamilton in a duel. In the 1930s, cartoonist Roy Crane visited and was so taken by the town streetcar that he used it as a model for his ``Toonerville Trolly.'' Visitors to St. Marys once got the impression that anything destined to happen here happened long ago. The nearness of the base is changing that. Crime is up, although local officials blame transient construction workers, not the military, for most of it. Low-cost housing developments are popping up everywhere. Only about 600 Navy personnel, mostly in the lower ranks, will be housed on the base. Fields and pine woods have given way to shopping malls, and the mushrooming strip of development along Highway 40 is cheek by jowl with the city limits. Tom Sterling, 80, runs the grocery store his father founded more than 100 years ago in St. Marys. ``We used to sell everything here, from horse collars on up, or maybe I should say on down,'' he says. Old friends stop by to pass the time and remember when. But the shelves are thinly stocked these days and customers are few. Malls and shopping centers built for the base trade, Sterling says, are drawing shoppers from St. Marys' few businesses as well. In the basement of Orange Hall, a Greek Revival splendor from the 1820s, Elvira Wildes tends a small information center. The Navy, she says, has gone out of its way to put the base in a positive light, especially to St. Marys' older residents. `They come to tell us the facts,'' she says. ``They told us it is the only Navy base being started from scratch. They give us tours on the ships, and we eat in the mess hall sometimes. ``If there is dirt and trash going on, and if there are people acting like they shouldn't, well I don't go to those places so I don't know about those things.'' There is no entertainment in St. Marys, she observes correctly. ``So why would they bother us?'' ``It is not an adversarial relationship,'' agrees Kenneth Kent, a financial analyst with the Coordinating Committee, which is trying to soften the impact of the base on the area. ``The Navy is trying to be a good neighbor.'' Alderman says the federally funded committee, made up of local government leaders, ``is to lay out the realities of a high-growth area and foresee problems down the road.'' The area has received some $37.5 million in federal impact payments since 1984. Alderman says Washington wanted to make 1989 the last year for impact funding. ``We estimate we would need $8.7 million in 1991 and $5.3 million in 1992,'' he says. ``The Navy isn't even thinking in terms of 1991 or 1992.'' Kent says a residential tax base generally is not sufficient to support residential services. ``There is virtually no industrial tax base here and only a nominal commercial base,'' he says. Much of the county is in timber, which is taxed at a low rate and thus provides little county income, he says. The county school tax already is 9 percent above that of other counties in the region, he says, and Camden County cannot absorb even the matching portions of the increased cost. ``The current tax situation allows counties to keep up existing schools but not to build new ones required by the increase in population,'' Kent says. ``A high percentage of the jobs on the base were to go to the local people but this has not happened the way it was expected to,'' Alderman says. Because special skills are needed for many jobs, he says, Camden County area residents generally have gotten lower-paying jobs toward the service end of the scale. ``Both the Navy and the region realize the need for a job-training program,'' he says. Alderman says Navy officials at St. Marys are aware of the problems and are trying to get Washington to do more. ``The critical point is at hand,'' Alderman says. ``We have found out now what has to be done.'' 
 EDITOR'S NOTE _ In a small automated plant in the middle of a scenic forest in upstate New York, men in green jump suits are testing a way to safely deal with radioactive waste and render it harmless. Advocates of nuclear power are optimistic, environmentalists are skeptical, while the local folk swap glow-in-the-dark jokes. 

All is not as it seems in this wooded, idyllic slice of the Allegheny Mountains known as the Enchanted Hills. True, the Cattaraugus Creek still snakes through sylvan glades of the Zoar Valley as it has for centuries, cutting a 200-foot gorge that enthralls the trout fisherman and thrills the whitewater rafter. But less than a mile away, a cluster of white buildings surrounded by barbed wire marks the site of some of the most highly concentrated radioactive waste in the world, stored in a massive underground tank. If released into the environment, the resulting radiation from the corrosive, near-boiling liquid would make the scenic area uninhabitable for almost as long as it took to make the gorge. It is the legacy of a former nuclear fuel reprocessing operation. That ominous distinction has made West Valley, 35 miles south of Buffalo, the scene of the nation's first large-scale attempt to try out radioactive waste treatment technology. The principles tested here are expected to be used in stabilizing similar wastes at federal installations in Savannah River, Ga. and Hanford, Wash., both of which have significantly greater amounts of radioactive wastes. ``We're proving that the nation can deal with nuclear wastes safely and effectively,'' says Willis Bixby, the Department of Energy's project director. Many environmentalists disagree, however, pointing out that modern science does not yet know how to render radioactive waste harmless. The goal of the $700 million project is to get the liquid wastes out of the aging tank and into a more stable form. Although other countries, such as France, which relies on nuclear power for 70 percent of its energy needs, have been using the technology for 20 years, the United States has simply stockpiled its nuclear wastes until now. West Valley was the nation's only commercial reprocessing facility. During the late '60s and early '70s, it took in spent fuel from nuclear power plants around the country and extracted usable uranium and plutonium. The byproduct of the process was some 600,000 gallons of waste. When it was built in the mid-1960s, New York Gov. Nelson Rockefeller saw the facility as an opportunity for the state to get in on the development of a technology that promised to solve the nation's energy needs. He envisioned a massive nuclear complex that would include reactors and research facilities. But that promise all but disappeared a few years later as declining markets, tougher federal regulations and the radiation hazards to workers forced the facility, run by Getty Oil Co., to close. It was inoperative from 1972 until 1982 when the federal Department of Energy began the West Valley Demonstration Project, a multimillion-dollar cleanup effort. The first step in a complicated process that has taken years to set up is to filter the liquid waste through columns filled with zeolite, a sandy clay. The filtering reduces the radioactivity of the liquid by 99 percent. The liquid is then blended with cement and poured into 71-gallon steel drums. Officials expect to produce some 15,000 of the drums, each weighing 1,000 pounds, by 1994. The remaining, concentrated zeolite wastes are to be transformed into 300 glass logs. The 10-foot logs will eventually be shipped to a federal repository for high-level wastes scheduled to be opened in Nevada in the year 2003. Until then, the glass logs are being kept on the site. West Valley Nuclear Services Co., a Westinghouse Electric Co. subsidiary handling the project, activated the treatment systems last spring with some 500 people involved in operations. Inside the white buildings, technicians in green jump suits with meters attached to their collars to measure their exposure to radiation use remote controls to pump the wastes through filters and solidification processes. Except for an incident in 1986, when 11 construction workers were contaminated after passing around a contaminated tool, there have been no major problems at the facility. All but one of the workers were back on the job several hours later. Project director Bixby thinks the safety record will contribute to greater public acceptance of the nuclear power industry. ``We can't make up for the negative publicity of Three Mile Island and Chernobyl,'' he says. ``But we can be a positive factor when people consider the risks of energy sources and begin to re-evaluate nuclear energy.'' Increasing attention to the wastes produced by combustible fuels and the so-called greenhouse effect and acid rain will lead people to reconsider nuclear power, he said. Local environmental activists, however, say the project will prove otherwise. ``It's impressive what they are doing, but it's no solution,'' says Carol Mongerson, a member of the Coalition on West Valley Nuclear Waste. ``All we've really done is change it from one form to another.'' Mongerson says solidified radioactive waste remains harmful for thousands of years. A single glass log will give off some 8,500 rems, enough radiation to kill a person exposed only for a few minutes. The coalition sued the state and federal governments to force Westinghouse to conduct an environmental impact study of its plans to hold cement drums in a vault at the site. A federal judge ruled that until the study is completed, the company must store the drums in a temporary facility. Mongerson says West Valley officials are engaging in a lot of ``wishful thinking'' about the future of the nuclear industry. ``There really isn't any feasible way of dealing with the byproducts,'' she says. Meanwhile, life in the nearby farming community life proceeds undaunted, with residents scoffing at suggestions of a catastrophic accident at the site. ``Heck, we're the ones who make up those glow-in-dark jokes,'' says Bernard ``Bud'' Williams, supervisor of the town of 2,000 people. 

Kim Delaney had to read some history to get ready for her new roll in the series ``Tour of Duty,'' which is set in a war she is too young to remember. Delaney joined the CBS series as it returned to the air this month for its second season, this time with more emphasis on women in the war. She plays Alex Devlin, a combat correspondent for a wire service called American News International. ``I had no real awareness of the war,'' Delaney says. ``The show's set in 1968 and I was only 7 years old. I didn't have much time to study before I got the job. But I've spent a lot of time since then reading and looking at documentaries, trying to get a feeling of the passion people felt then. It's particularly hard to find something written by a woman.'' In its first season last year, ``Tour of Duty'' focused on an Army platoon assigned to combat duty in the late 1960s. This season, the time frame moves ahead slightly to 1968 and the platoon is reassigned to Tan Son Nhut Air Force Base in Saigon. Besides Delaney, Betsy Brantley and Dan Gauthier have also joined the cast. Brantley plays a civilian psychologist working for the government and Gauthier is a young helicopter pilot. The show's returning stars are Terence Knox, Stephen Caffrey, Tony Becker, Stan Foster, Ramon Franco and Miguel A. Nunez Jr. The changes in ``Tour of Duty,'' heretofore an all-male show that revolved around combat situations, undoubtedly reflect the success of ABC's ``China Beach.'' That show, set at a hospital and rest and recreation area, puts its emphasis on the women in Vietnam. Delaney says she is sometimes confused with Dana Delany, who stars as a nurse in ``China Beach.'' ``My character has an office in Saigon but she spends a lot of time in the field,'' she says. ``It's a good role because I'm not with just one person. I'm involved with all the people. Alex is innocent when she arrives. She hasn't been corrupted by the world. She wants to get to the truth of each story, whatever it is, at any cost.'' Alex Devlin also develops a love interest with Lt. Myron Goldman, the platoon leader played by Stephen Caffrey. She's also attracted to Lt. Johnny McKay, the helicopter pilot played by Gauthier. Her role as a correspondent requires her to take frequent trips to combat zones in a helicopter. Delaney made her professional debut in the ABC soap opera ``All My Children'' in New York. She had a recurring role in NBC's ``L.A. Law'' and earlier this year was in the NBC miniseries ``Something Is Out There.'' In the miniseries, she played the girlfriend of Joe Cortese, who is her boyfriend in real life. ``I grew up in Philadelphia and went to all-girls Catholic schools,'' she says. ``I didn't act in high school because I was very shy. I had four brothers and I probably spent more time at their school than mine. Actually, I didn't know what I wanted to do. ``My father came home from work one day and said how about court reporter? He wanted me to go to college, but he knew I was rebelling against more schooling. I studied court reporting some. I can't imagine doing that today.'' After high school she moved to New York and began a modeling career. ``I got an agent and he gave me the name of some acting coaches,'' she says. ``I studied for two years. That's when I knew I couldn't imagine doing anything else. My second year of studying I got `All My Children.' ``I wasn't sure I should take it. I made sure I was out of the studio in time for my classes. The other actors thought I was crazy. I was just starting out. I didn't know what blocking meant. I didn't know how to make my mark. Some of the show's crew stayed after hours to show me how to move.'' Her character on the soap opera, Jenny Gardener, ``took off like a shot,'' she says. ``She was a very sweet ingenue, a victim, a girl from the wrong side of the tracks trying to make good.'' Delaney stayed with the show three years. Her first movie was ``That Was Then, This Is Now,'' which took her to Minnesota. Since then, she's been in ``The Drifter,'' ``Delta Force,'' ``Campus Man'' and ``Hunter's Blood.'' Her TV films include ``Take My Daughters, Please,'' ``Christmas Comes To Willow Creek,'' ``Cracked Up,'' ``First Affair'' and ``Perry Mason: The Case of the Sinister Spirit.'' 

Ruth Brown is getting ahead by going backward. She became a recording star singing rhythm 'n' blues in the 1950s. Now she's on Broadway singing jazz and blues dating fro the three decades before that. And it works. She's teamed with Linda Hopkins and Carrie Smith in the revue ``Black and Blue,'' a celebration of songs from the '20s, '30s and '40s. It opens on Broadway tonight (Jan. 15) at the Minskoff Theater, not just the three singers, but tap dancers and well-known jazz musicians in the band. When ``Black and Blue'' opened in Paris in 1985, it ran for eight months and Vogue magazine called it, ``The coolest thing in Paris ... a red-hot revival of black American music.'' In the 1950s, Miss Brown was Atlantic Records' most-recorded performer. She pumped out some 87 rhythm 'n' blues releases and some called Atlantic ``the House that Ruth Built.'' She admits that, at her ``Black and Blue'' audition, ``I was a little hesitant, to tell the truth. I'd been singing rhythm 'n' blues. I had not experienced that whole Cotton Club scene; that's what the general idea was based on. ``We went to Paris shortly after the movie `The Cotton Club' had been a good hit in Paris.'' But now, harkening back to some of the fine old hits of an earlier golden age of cabarets and Broadway revues, she is not only comfortable, she promises new success. If ``Black and Blue's'' three singers are patterned after anybody, she says, it is the Peters Sisters, a trio of American sisters who became a hit in Europe. ``The last one, Virginia Peters, is living in Paris. She saw the show and said she was pleased. It was reminiscent of her good times.'' Miss Brown had three solos in Paris and she still does, but ``Mood Indigo'' has been replaced by ``Body and Soul.'' Singing those songs she says, ``was really like going back to my beginning.'' She was born Ruth Weston on Jan. 12, 1928, in Portsmouth, Va., the oldest of seven children whose father was a Methodist choir director. At 16, she joined Lucky Millinder's band. Traveling with Millinder, she says, ``I was keeping company with one of the fellows in the band. Unless I wanted to be buried when I got home, I thought I better get married. That's how I got Brown.'' By the time she got to Washington, she and trumpeter Jimmy Brown were separated and Millinder fired her for fetching drinks for the musicians. She had left home against her father's wishes and found herself without the price of a bus ticket home, ``standing on a street corner by the Howard Theater with my suitcase in my hand, 225 miles from home. ``A young man walked up I recognized; he was a singer with Horace Heidt. He took me to the Crystal Caverns and introduced me to Blanche Calloway. She gave me a chance to sing for her audience. They received me in such a way she said she'd put me to work for a week. ``Blanche was Cab Calloway's sister. She was one of the first female band leaders and one of the most gorgeous women ever to grace the stage. This show would have been her cup of tea.'' Blanche Calloway became her manager. Miss Brown says, ``She called the son of the Turkish ambassador who was starting a record company and suggested he get down and listen to this girl.'' Ahmet Ertegun listened and Ruth Brown was signed to the fledgling Atlantic Records in 1949. Miss Brown's first recording at Atlantic Records was a ballad, ``So Long.'' Then staff writer Rudy Toombs brought in a fast song, ``Teardrops from My Eyes,'' which she also recorded for Atlantic. ``It took,'' she says. ``It was the first thing I'd done with a back beat. It was really danceable. It went into the charts at 3 or 4, moved into No. 1 and stayed about 27 weeks.'' She says that the song of hers people remember best is ``Mama, He Treats Your Daughter Mean.'' ``No matter where I go, 35 years later they ask for that song.'' Other big records were ``5-10-15 Hours (of Your Love),'' ``Oh What a Dream,'' ``Mambo Baby'' and ``Lucky Lips,'' which moved from the rhythm 'n' blues best-selling charts to the pop charts, unusual in those days. It wasn't always sunshine. She has had to get 9-to-5 jobs from time to time and dropped out of show business to raise her children. Record royalties stopped until, in 1985, attorney Howell Begle, a rhythm 'n' blues fan, began to look into her case, and others. Now she gets monthly statements and has received one lump sum payment going back to 1970. ``I'm satisfied,'' she says. ``A lot of people have been helped, even at this late stage of the game. Ahmet made the decision to let us go ahead amicably. He could have caused us to stay in court a long time and most of us didn't have the money to do that.'' Last season Miss Brown was off-Broadway in the musical, ``Staggerlee.'' A casting director saw that and invited her to read for Motormouth Mabel in the film ``Hairspray.'' She got the part. In December she was featured in a PBS documentary, ``That Rhythm, Those Blues.'' She has been married four times. ``I have two fine sons. They're actors in California, waiting for the big moment they're going to get their star on the sidewalk.'' Her grandson recently appeared in a McDonald's commercial as a future Olympics long-distance runner. ``I've been more active in the last year and a half than ever,'' she says. ``I've been back doing nightclubs and I went to a jazz festival in Japan. I've really got the bug for acting. Fantasy Records put out `Have a Good Time,' cut live in Los Angeles. I've got the feeling, as the old folks say, I'm on a roll.'' 
Here are Broadway's new and current shows. Ticket supply as of Jan. 6 is indicated as Difficult or Available. Credit card holders can order tickets by phone or by calling Telecharge, Teletron or Ticketron. Telecharge's number is 212-239-6200 unless otherwise indicated. Teletron's number is 212-246-0102. Ticketron is 212-399-4444. For 24-hour information on theater, dance and music performances, call the Theater Development Fund's New York City@On Stage, 212-587-1111. When calling theaters directly, use New York area code 212. Advance inquiries should be made, as ticket availability is subject to change. _ ``A Chorus Line,'' the longest-running musical in Broadway history, is about the hard life and struggles of chorus-line members. Shubert, 239-6200, same number as Telecharge. Ticketron. Available. _ ``Ain't Misbehavin','' Patti Austin stars in a revival of the Fats Waller musical revue. Ambassador, 239-6200, same number as Telecharge. Ticketron. Available. _ ``Anything Goes,'' a revival by the Lincoln Center Theater of the 1934 Cole Porter musical. Vivian Beaumont, 239-6200, same number as Telecharge. Ticketron. Available. _ ``Black and Blue,'' Ruth Brown and Linda Hopkins star in a musical revue celebrating blues songs and the art of tap dancing. Now in previews, opens Jan. 15. Minskoff, 869-0550. Teletron. Available. _ ``Cats,'' musical based on T.S. Eliot's cat poems, music by Andrew Lloyd Webber of ``Evita'' fame. Winter Garden, 239-6200, same number as Telecharge. Ticketron. Available. _ ``Eastern Standard,'' a comedy by Richard Greenberg about the young, upwardly mobile in New York of the late 1980s. Golden, 239-6200, same number as Telecharge. Ticketron. Available. _ ``42nd Street,'' hit remake of the 1930s movie-musical classic. St. James, 398-0280. Teletron. Ticketron. Closes Jan. 8. Available. _ ``Into the Woods,'' a Stephen Sondheim musical about several fairy tale characters and what takes place after ``happily ever after.'' Martin Beck, 246-6363. Teletron. Ticketron. Available. _ ``Legs Diamond,'' Peter Allen stars in a musical about the big-time New York gangster. Mark Hellinger, 757-7064. Teletron. Available. _ ``Les Miserables,'' a lavish musical retelling of the epic Victor Hugo novel. Broadway, 239-6200, same number as Telecharge. Ticketron. Difficult. _ ``M. Butterfly,'' David Dukes stars in a play by David Henry Hwang about the love affair between a French diplomat and a Chinese opera star. Winner of the 1988 Tony Award as best play. Eugene O'Neill, 246-0220. Teletron. Ticketron. Difficult. _ ``Me and My Girl,'' the 1930s English musical hit about a cockney scamp making it big in high society. Marquis, 382-0100. Teletron. Ticketron. Available. _ ``Oh! Calcutta!,'' long-running nudie musical that spoofs sex and swinging and such. Edison, 302-2302. Available. _ ``Our Town,'' a revival by the Lincoln Center Theater of the Thornton Wilder classic. Spalding Gray plays the stage manager. Lyceum, 239-6200, same number as Telecharge. Available. _ ``Romance Romance,'' two one-act musicals about the vagaries of love. Barry Williams, formerly of ``The Brady Bunch,'' and Alison Fraser star. Helen Hayes, 944-9450. Teletron. Advertising ``Last Weeks.'' Available. _ ``Rumors,'' a farce by Neil Simon that takes place during an anniversary party. Broadhurst, 239-6200, same number as Telecharge. Ticketron. Available. _ ``Sarafina!,'' a South African musical about high school students in a black township. Cort, 239-6200, same number as Telecharge. Available. _ ``Senator Joe,'' a musical written and directed by Tom O'Horgan about the late Sen. Joseph McCarthy. Now in previews, opens Jan. 19. Neil Simon, 757-8646. Teletron. Available. _ ``Starlight Express,'' an Andrew Lloyd Webber-Trevor Nunn roller-skating extravaganza about a train race across the United States. Gershwin, 586-6510. Teletron. Available. _ ``The Devil's Disciple,'' a revival of the George Bernard Shaw comedy set in New Hampshire during the Revolutionary War. Circle in the Square, 239-6200, same number as Telecharge. Ticketron. Advertising ``Last Weeks.'' Available. _ ``The Phantom of the Opera,'' the lavish Andrew Lloyd Webber musical about a deformed composer who haunts the Paris Opera House and the young soprano he loves. Winner of the 1988 Tony Award as best musical. Majestic, 239-6290, a special Telecharge number. Difficult. 
What Melanie Griffith does in ``Working Girl'' to get ahead in the business world would get her fired from any financial house in New York. So why do audiences cheer for her masterful connivings? Because Griffith's Tess McGill is quite the most endearing movie character in years. With her wide innocent eyes and shy, lispy voice, she conceals a quicksilver mind that outraces the executives who treat her like a servant with a note pad. Tess is a three-time loser, as she is reminded by her employment counselor (Olympia Dukakis in a pre-Oscar bit). But Tess manages to land another job, joining a bullpen of anonymous secretaries. Her boss is the smarmy Katharine Parker (Siguorney Weaver), who professes to be democratic but steals Tess' ideas and demeans her as much as the male superiors. By careful reading of the gossip and financial columns, Tess divines that a money-rich conglomerate might be ripe to buy a radio chain. Her boss dismisses the notion, then goes off on a ski vacation and breaks her leg. Tess usurps the boss' office and wardrobe and sets her plan in motion, enlisting the help of an ambitious broker, Harrison Ford. Kevin Wade has fashioned a screenplay filled with crisp dialogue, witty observation and delightful surprises. So what if all of Tess' plans, as well as her personal life, turn out beautifully? ``Working Girl'' is a story that demands a happy ending. The proceedings are given a sophisticated polish by Mike Nichols, at the top of his directorial skill. Adding to the happy blend is a lilting score by Carly Simon, who employs a handful of old standards. Melanie Griffith occupies the screen almost throughout, and the fascination never fades. She emerges as a major star. Harrison Ford, a.k.a. Han Solo and Indiana Jones, handsomely fits his Brooks Brothers clothes; he is the ideal Prince Charming for Griffith's Cinderella. Courageously abandoning her usual star turn, Sigourney Weaver plays the heartless boss with great flair. Another star of ``Working Girl'' is the Manhattan cityscape. It has never looked more stunning than through Michael Ballhaus' camera. Douglas Wick produced the 20th Century Fox release. The R rating seems harsh in view of the limited nudity and few sex scenes. Running time: 113 minutes. 
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions: G _ General audiences. All ages admitted. PG _ Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children. PG-13 _ Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children. R _ Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian. X _ No one under 17 admitted. Some states may have higher age restrictions. 
 Videos reviewed this week: ``Young Guns,'' ``Five Corners,'' ``Midnight Crossing.''  ``Young Guns'' (Vestron Video. VHS-Beta, $89.98. Rated R)  As almost everyone knows, William Bonney probably was as twisted a psychopathic little geek as ever crawled out from under a rock. Adenoidal, visibly retarded, stumpy-legged and physically dirty, Billy the Kid was glorified by the penny press of his day as a clean-limbed, resolute pistol fighter who killed by the Code of the West. My, how we've changed. ``Young Guns'' casts a twitchy Emilio Estevez as Billy, with nattering sidekicks Kiefer Sutherland, Charlie Sheen, Casey Siemasko, Lou Diamond Phillips and Dermot Mulroney. Terence Stamp phones in his part as a smarmy British rancher and Jack Palance plays Jack Palance, his bad-guy antagonist in New Mexico's Lincoln County war of 1878. Guns roar. Ricochets whine. Sutherland murmurs. Estevez whines. Palance smirks, having picked up another payday. Suffocatingly directed by Christopher Cain, written by John Fusco, it makes you want to run out and rent ``The Wild Bunch.'' The movie's greatest moment is Brian Keith's cameo as a tough, coarse, filthy bounty hunter who comes within an ace of blowing our boy heroes off the planet. For a second the movie opens up and shows signs of life. False alarm. _ By Scott Williams, Associated Press Writer. 
 ``Five Corners'' (Cannon Video. VHS-Beta, $89.95. Rated R) 
 Writer John Patrick Shanley, who took viewers to the sweet streets of Brooklyn in ``Moonstruck,'' moves to the mean streets of the Bronx in 1964 with ``Five Corners.'' Unlike ``Moonstruck,'' this 1988 movie was no hit. But both Shanley products have an appealing fairy-tale feel with their roots squarely planted in the mundane. Jodie Foster is lovely as Linda, a tough young woman frightened at the release of a man sent to prison for trying to rape her. John Turturro is truly terrifying as Heinz, still obsessed with Linda. Tim Robbins (``Bull Durham'') plays Harry, Linda's savior, who after his policeman father is killed becomes profoundly affected by the work and words of Martin Luther King Jr. The characters' paths cross in a neighborhood of violence and poverty. Some escape into a private fantasy world, others by leaving, like Harry who plans to go South to register black voters. Heinz cannot escape, and Turturro makes you feel how penned in his character feels. There are drugs and pointless vandalism, penguins in a fountain, a St. Bernard named The Buddah, dark humor and, mostly, people just trying to get by in a world that shouldn't be so tough. ``Five Corners'' is eccentric and engaging, and above all worth watching. But the end is less than satisfying, as a world lacking in peace and order is tied up a little too neatly by the credits. _ By Mary MacVean, Associated Press Writer. 
 ``Midnight Crossing'' (MCA Home Entertainment. VHS-Beta, $89.98. Rated R)  Flashback: Castro is coming out of the Cuban highlands and Batista's casino operators are moving their cash out of the country. Somehow a bunch of U.S. Navy men get hold of $2 million of it and stash it on this island, see? Cut to the present: Daniel J. Travanti was one of the sailors. The other one who knew where the treasure is has died, so Travanti wants to go back and get it. (Why did they wait 20 years? Good question.) Travanti's wife, played by Faye Dunaway, is blind, sort of. (``I specialized in eye diseases. So how did I get glaucoma?'' Good question.) He charters the yacht of his suspiciously deceased shipmate's son (John Laughlin), whose perky, pouty wife (Kim Cattrall) works in Capt. Frank Furillo's insurance agency. (Why? Good question.) By this point you've sunk 45 minutes in this sucker and nothing's happening. Wait a second! ... Hey, isn't this the perfect bunch to erupt in jealousy, lust, murderous intrigue and pistols and spearguns and all kinds of neat-o, bloodiness played out beneath a cruel, cruel Caribbean sun? Good question! Travanti sleepwalks through his role. Dunaway is at her most brittle, shrewish and shrill. The juve leads are bland as custard. Phony tension, childish intrigue, unbelievably stupid plot tricks. Worse, the venerable Ned Beatty is written into the plot _ and just as quickly written out. How did all these clever, handsome people make this bad movie? Good question. _ By Scott Williams, Associated Press Writer. 
Motion Picture Association of America rating definitions: G _ General audiences. All ages admitted. PG _ Parental guidance suggested. Some material may not be suitable for children. PG-13 _ Special parental guidance strongly suggested for children under 13. Some material may be inappropriate for young children. R _ Restricted. Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian. X _ No one under 17 admitted. Some states may have higher age restrictions. 
 ``When in Rome'' (Virgin) _ When in Rome  This self-titled debut record from a trio of Englishmen sounds like a lot of today's pop music: synthesizer-based, danceable and rather empty-headed. When in Rome is the nom de guerre of vocalist Andrew Mann, bassist-vocalist Clive Farrington and keyboardist Michael Floreale. On their album, the three are joined by a host of session musicians who chime in on percussion, guitars, keyboards and horns. The songs center around Floreale's multi-faceted keyboards and the dual vocals of Farrington and Mann. The two singers harmonize perfectly, singing lead vocals together on nearly every tune. The music is generally bright and perky, sort of what the Pet Shop Boys probably sound like when they've had too much coffee. In fact, the bubbly, bongo-based percussion often reminds the listener of one of those percolating coffee pots. ``The Promise,'' a hit in Great Britain, is typical. Starting with a piano that picks out the melody, the song throbs along electronically with the clear harmonies of Mann and Farrington piercing through the catchy melody. Most of the record thumps along in this vein, although on Side 2 there is a greater reliance on real instruments (as opposed to their synthesizer-produced imitations) that makes things more interesting. ``Child's Play'' sports a clean trumpet solo over the vocal duet, while ``Total Devotion'' is a fast-paced rave-up with a real rock 'n' roll piano solo and some full-throated sax licks. All in all, ``When in Rome'' makes hip-sounding dance music that probably will blast out of speakers at college parties around the country. The group, however, has little to say _ lyrically or musically _ and their debut album just glides along the mainstream like driftwood. _ By Curt Anderson, Associated Press Writer. 
 ``Greatest Hits Live'' (Arista) _ Carly Simon  Last year Barbra Streisand released a recording of a rare live performance she gave before a small audience. Now Carly Simon, another pop singer who seldom gives concerts, has copied the strategy. But Miss Simon does it better. Miss Streisand's ``One Voice'' had problems with pacing and song selection. But ``Greatest Hits Live'' is a nice mixture of well-known and unfamiliar material _ the album title notwithstanding _ and the emphasis throughout is on the singer and the songs. In her first performance before a live audience in eight years, Miss Simon makes such hits from the early 1970s as ``Anticipation'' and ``The Right Thing To Do'' sound fresh. And the record climaxes with the ambitious ``Coming Around Again,'' which includes the nursery rhyme ``Itsy Bitsy Spider'' as a descant. A crack band and intelligent, varied arrangements complete the package. Miss Simon has been accused in the past of singing flat, but this set is sharp all the way around. _ By Steven Wine, Associated Press Writer. 
You might expect an intensely serious actor such as John Malkovich to delve into 18th century French history in order to play a decadent aristocrat in ``Dangerous Liaisons.'' Wrong. ``Mostly you just play the part as written,'' he admits. ``People's behavior and the way they view the world and their very actions are just in the writing. Study the character's motivations and history? Not for me. Afraid not.'' ``Dangerous Liaisons'' is based on Chonderlos De Laclos' scandalous 1782 novel and Christopher Hampton's modern play ``Les Liaisons Dangereuses.'' Malkovich as the unscrupulous Valmont connives with Glenn Close, another sex-obsessed aristocrat, in bedroom games that ruin the lives of several people. ``I wouldn't really describe Valmont as evil,'' the actor mused. ``He has a lot of suspiciousness to him, and he does a lot of things that are really mean. But I don't think in the end that he is really evil. ``One of the things the picture is about is that he is unaware that he is capable of love, unaware that he is capable of feeling, unaware that he is capable of provoking that emotion in someone else. Once he discovers that he can do that, it goes against everything he has ever believed about himself. Finally it destroys him.'' Malkovich seemed a reluctant recruit to Warner Bros.' hoopla for ``Dangerous Liaisons.'' Although highly visible on the screen since his 1984 debut as the combat photographer in ``The Killing Fields,'' he has maintained a low profile in the media. But he considered the selling of ``Dangerous Liasions'' to be part of his job. A soft-spoken man, he carefully chooses his words, as if wary of being misinterpreted. He bristled somewhat at the intimation that he was not exactly type-cast as the dashing, amorous Valmont. ``Any character I play is not like me, so it doesn't really matter what the differences are,'' he said. ``If you're intimating that I'm not sex-charged or romantic, you may be completely correct. I'm also not a psychopath or a robot or blind or anything else I play.'' The stars of ``Dangerous Liaisons'' _ Malkovich, Close, Michelle Pfeiffer _ are American, and their speech is Americanized. This is part of the plan by the original producer, Lorimar Telepictures. ``Although the original novel was French and the play on which the movie was based was written by an Englishman, Christopher Hampton, and the director (Stephen Frears) is English, they (Lorimar) very much wanted American actors,'' said Malkovich. ``We tried to make a more or less concerted effort to sound not too American. Also we didn't want to sound English at all.'' No chance of John Malkovich sounding English. He was born in the American heartland, in the small town of Benton, Ill. His life changed in 1973 when he happened into a drama class at Eastern Illinois University. ``I had a girlfriend who was an actress, and I knew absolutely nothing about theater or films,'' he said. ``We didn't have theater within hundreds of miles of my hometown. ``So she was an actress, and I started following her around, watching rehearsals. Eventually, I started doing it myself. I kept doing it the last two years in school, then I met the people who started the Steppenwolf theater in Chicago. In '76 when we all left school, I went with them.'' Malkovich became one of the pillars of Steppenwolf, with which he is still associated. He attracted rave reviews when the company played in New York, and he won an Obie in Sam Shepard's ``True West.'' His second film, ``Places in the Heart,'' won him an Academy Award nomination as supporting actor, and he has followed with ``Eleni,'' ``Making Mr. Right,'' ``The Glass Menagerie'' and ``Empire of the Sun.'' He played Biff to Dustin Hoffman's Willy Loman in ``Death of a Salesman'' on Broadway and won an Emmy for the television version. Were movies an early ambition? ``No, it's not something I gave a lot of thought to.'' Did it happen by accident? ``I think we could say that. I did some plays and people asked me to do this film and that film and it sort of mushroomed and spiraled out of control.'' Is film work as fulfilling as the theater? ``Rarely. This particular one, yes, because it was a particularly good part. I enjoyed the people I worked with, and I really cared about the story. Plus I worked a lot. Usually on films that doesn't happen. That's the thing that usually drives me nuts: There's so much waiting around. It's too long between times of working.'' 
The famous mezzo-soprano Marilyn Horne pauses in detailing her busy life to ruminate about one difference between actors and singers. Actors, she said, don't always get to do the works of the greatest writers and playwrights. But in classical music, ``we're dealing with the masters all the time.'' The good things she's singing range from the most obscure, which she relishes introducing, to the very familiar, such as Bizet's ``Carmen.'' ``I keeping saying I'm going to pull up a bit on opera and do less,'' she said. ``I keep doing more. It seems like there are so many offers coming up all the time. It's crazy.'' In September and October, Miss Horne sang seven performances of ``Maometto II'' _ an 1820 Rossini opera having its American premiere _ at the San Francisco Opera. In November, she sang Dame Quickly eight times in ``Falstaff,'' a Verdi masterpiece, at the Lyric Opera of Chicago. In December she was at the Metropolitan Opera six times as Carmen. In January and February, the concentration is on Rossini's ``Tancredi,'' first in Chicago, then Los Angeles. After that comes a recital tour and more ``Tancredi'' in Barcelona followed by ``Rinaldo'' in Venice and Rossini's comic ``The Italian Girl in Algiers'' in London. Miss Horne, who has a coloratura facility rare in voices lower than soprano, is especially acclaimed for singing Rossini, who expected coloratura singing even from men. ```Maometto II' is a really fabulous Rossini work that he rewrote,'' she said. ``He wrote it in his Naples period, and when he went to Paris he rewrote it as `The Siege of Corinth' _ that I sang at La Scala in 1969. The versions are quite different.'' The San Francisco Opera and Miss Horne decided on ``Maometto'' instead of ``Siege'' because ``Maometto'' had never been presented in the United States. ``It was an enormous success _ much beyond our expectations,'' she said. ``The Rossini seria operas are still something that people are not too familiar with. I think they're bowled over by the music.'' In opera seria, which came before grand opera, each scene had a recitative to relate a plot event, followed by an aria that commented on the event. The arias often were written to show off particular singers. These operas were slim on acting but the good ones were stuffed with beautiful music. Next season Miss Horne will sing in ``Falstaff'' and Vivaldi's ``Orlando furioso'' in San Francisco. ``It's a staggeringly beautiful opera which, whenever we've done it, has never been less than a screaming, stomping success,'' she said. ``My dream is to talk the Met into it. So far they're not interested. I'm hoping they'll come and see this and say, `We have to have this.' I would love to be the first person to bring a Vivaldi opera to the Met _ as I did with Handel.'' In May, she'll sing concerts with the Detroit and Indiana symphonies. ``I've always felt a balance between opera and concerts is good for me vocally. I think it's good for the longevity of the voice. One is so outgoing and one is so intimate. You can get too much one or the other. You can get yourself into a little bit of trouble vocally. ``Sometimes a singer needs to have a real good sing. You need to get out there and belt it out. And sometimes you need to use the utmost of control with your voice.'' Instead of dieting these days, Miss Horne says she does aerobics and calisthenics an hour a day, six days a week. ``I have a trainer who comes and puts me through my paces. If I have to walk 20 or 30 blocks, I just walk out the door and do it. I'm really pleased because I feel so good.'' Miss Horne has been singing in public since 1954, when she dubbed the voice of Dorothy Dandridge in the movie ``Carmen Jones.'' ``I'm on maintenance for my voice now, too. I'm trying to maintain what I've got.'' Angela, the daughter of Miss Horne and her former husband, conductor Henry Lewis, recently moved to Los Angeles, where she has a job assisting a director on a film. Lewis will conduct ``Tancredi'' in Los Angeles and Barcelona. ``We occasionally do concerts together, too,'' Miss Horne said. ``We've always remained really close friends and conferred on anything serious that had to do with Angela all the time she was growing up. ``Angela loves `Carmen' and `Norma.' She saw her first `Norma' when she was 5 at Covent Garden. Joan (Sutherland) and I did it there.'' But Angela soon spoke of ``my music'' _ rock _ and ``your music'' _ classical, her mother recalled. ``Then I phoned her a couple of years ago and heard what I thought was singing in the background. She said, `I'm taping some of your records to play in the car.' I thought, `That's it. We've finally done it.''' 
Don and David Was, authors of the hit single, ``Spy in the House of Love,'' would like to thank many people for the success of Was (Not Was): Moonie Krupka, jazz critic David Weiss, funk king George Clinton, music executive Michael Zilkha, and, of course, Don's 2-year-old son. Get the picture? Well, there's more. The Was would also like to extend their appreciation to singers Sweet Pea Atkinson and Harry Bowen, rocker Elvis Costello and Frank Sinatra Jr., all contributors to the group's third album, ``What Up, Dog?'' Still confused? Then go back about 20 years when two young smart alecks named Donald Fagenson and David Weiss were growing up in the suburbs of Detroit. The story begins with our heroes in eighth grade gym class. This is where Moonie Krupka comes in. ``Some of the students were using tumbling equipment without supervision,'' Weiss recalled in an interview at the Manhattan offices of Chrysalis Records. ``When the teacher found out he asked who had done it. Don and I decided to withhold information, but a guy named Moonie Krupka ratted on us. We met outside the teacher's office.'' And so the friendship was born _ Weiss, the poet who could not remember lyrics to the Motown hits sung in the school bathrooms, and Fagenson, the natural musician experimenting with multi-track recordings at age 14. They each attended the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor, but eventually went their separate ways. Weiss headed west and became a jazz critic for the Los Angeles Herald Examiner. ``I fancied myself a writer,'' Weiss said. ``I was really just a big jazz fan.'' Fagenson, meanwhile, took to the ``trenches'' in Detroit, doing studio work and performing Gilbert O'Sullivan songs (``Alone Again, Naturally,'' ``Get Down'') in local bars. ``I was at wits end,'' Fagenson recalled. ``You can only do so much hackwork. It'll drive you nuts, especially if you have a statement you've got to make. I felt the moment slipping away. I called David and said, `Let's go down in glory.''' So in 1980, Was (Not Was) was formed. The name being inspired by none other than Don's little boy, who had invented phrases such as ``Blue (Not Blue)'' and ``Hot (Not Hot).'' The Was write most of the group's material and also play a number of instruments, including keyboards, flute, harmonica and mandolin. For singers, they recruited Atkinson and Bowen, who had been performing backing vocals at the Sound Suite. Clinton, mastermind of Parliament-Funkadelic, enters the story because his music and satirical style of writing are powerful influences on Was (Not Was). ``George Clinton played at our high school dance when his group was still called the Parliaments,'' Weiss said. ``They came and lip-synced `I Just Wanna Testify' at our dance. He was obviously the first black hippie anybody had ever seen so he really made quite an impact.'' With the help of a friendly jazz critic, Was (Not Was) managed to get signed to Ze Records, an independent label, in 1980. ``I violated journalistic ethics by sending the demo to Ze Records with a cover letter record from myself as a critic saying you must listen to these guys,'' Weiss confessed. The ploy worked. Zilkha, the president of Ze, liked Was (Not Was) and the group's self-titled debut album came out in 1981. The record sold poorly, however, and Was (Not Was) tried its luck the following year with Geffen Records, formed by David Geffen, who had helped discover the Eagles and Jackson Browne among many others. It was, in Weiss' words, ``The beginning of the end of the beginning.'' ``We came in as this pan-ethnic dance act, this heterosexual `Village People,''' Weiss said. ``Geffen's people thought in terms of hit records. `Get rid of the black guys (Atkinson and Bowen),' they told us. `You're blue-eyed soul. You need a Paul Young or Daryl Hall to front the group.''' Out of this promising relationship came the group's sole album for Geffen, ``Born to Laugh at Tornadoes,'' released in 1983. The record bombed and Was (Not Was) spent the next two years trying to get out of its contract. ``We were pariahs at our own record companies,'' Weiss said. Was (Not Was) did manage to have a couple of hits in Europe and is now happily signed with Chrysalis records. ``What Up, Dog?'' is a mix of funky tracks such as ``Spy'' and ``Anytime Lisa,'' the off-the-wall ``Earth to Doris'' (featuring Weiss' anguished vocals) and the heartfelt ``Love Can be Bad Luck.'' Sinatra can be heard crooning ``Wedding Vows in Las Vegas,'' a less-than-romantic look at life in the gambling mecca. ``It was a case of him seeing the song and being glad he had an original piece of music that he could relate to,'' said Fagenson, inspired to use the singer after seeing his name on a marquee. ``There was a great deal of pathos in that lyric. It's a sad place and I thought he captured it.'' Now that they are commercial successes, fans will no doubt want to know Weiss and Fagenson's secret to writing hit singles. Explained Weiss: ``We're the first audience for each other. I think our relationship is like a great author's relationship with his publisher where you really need that third eye on things. If we can prove this to each other, we can prove it to the audience at large because we're so tough on each other.'' Added Fagenson: ``He's just a lazy guy; he won't compose until he has words.'' 
The story of child abuse that Sylvia Fraser tells in ``My Father's House'' would be chilling on any terms. But, even more so, the story is the writer's own. Fraser created a separate identity, another self, to exist when her father sexually abused her during childhood. The other self remained hidden and unknown to her for 40 years until she realized she had been an abused child and summoned back the memories. In an interview in her nearly all-white living room, the author said she started to write a novel about what had happened but was ``offended'' by the idea that she was putting into fiction something that was fact. She decided to go ahead with the book despite the self-exposure needed. The response has been positive, she said, including many letters from people who tell her, ``You've written my story.'' ``My Father's House'' was first published last year by Doubleday Canada and, now in paperback, has been high on the Canadian best-seller lists. It recently was published in hardcover in the United States. ``Without being distracted by the `freak' element, one can relax and enjoy Ms. Fraser's writing, which is rich yet superbly honed,'' Jill Johnston wrote in The New York Times Book Review. While the story has been told before in such books as ``Sybil,'' this is the first book by a professional writer about her own abuse and multiple personality. Unlike Sybil, whose case has been documented by psychologists, Fraser did not seek psychiatric help. She completely blocked out all conscious memory of her abuse and maintained that the child victim was a completely separate personality. Through personal awareness and woman consciousness-raising sessions in the 1970s, she slowly came to terms with who she was. The actual memory came spontaneously while she was socializing one day with friends. Fraser was a journalist before her first novel, ``Pandora,'' was published in 1972. She has written four novels since, all of them including themes or incidents of sexual violence. ``Of course, now I understand that it was my other self,'' she said. ``My whole writing impulse had really come from my abused self.'' ``My Father's House'' is a sort of detective story in which Fraser searches for the unknown portions of her own past. Yet it also is a remarkably vivid memoir of growing up in Hamilton, a city about an hour's drive southwest of Toronto, in the 1940s and '50s. ``We were all stereotyped and terribly repressed,'' Fraser said, proceeding with the interview despite having a ``beastly cold.'' ``I think it was a very nasty time to grow up. It wasn't an age of innocence, it was an age of repression.'' Fraser believes her father's secret may have been known or suspected among their relatives or neighbors but was simply too horrendous to be considered in that era when even divorce was thought of as a dirty word. ``The times were such that it was better not to remember,'' she said. While she blocked the memories of the experiences lived by her other self, she had nearly total recall of everything else. ``We're now talking about memories that are 40 years old,'' the author said. Fraser attributes the crucial decisions made in her life, from walking out on a good marriage to an affair with the father of a childhood friend, to the confusion underlying an always outwardly strong front. ``The whole emotional drive of my life was to reunite my two selves,'' she said. ``I spent a lifetime with this mystery at my core.'' Fraser, who started her career as a feature writer for the Toronto Star's weekly, said the dual personality she developed during her childhood was an extension of the device most people use to show different aspects at different times. The difference in her case, she said, was the blocking off so that one self was not aware of the other. Perhaps in response to puzzled looks, she said, ``It's not something to intellectualize too much. You feel it _ or if you don't, you don't.'' Her memory of the other self came back in December 1983. ``This I do know: My father was not a monster. His life was a bud that never opened, blighted by the first frost. His crime became his prison, his guilt his bars,'' she writes in ``My Father's House.'' ``The force with which I came to hate my father was a measure of the love I and my other self once bore him. I know that now.'' Fraser said she no longer is angry. ``I was a very angry child and a very angry adult,'' she said. ``I'd worn that out; I'd used up all my anger. ... Basically I don't care anymore. It really is behind me.'' Her next book, whether a novel or non-fiction, probably will be ``fantastical, imaginative, much airier'' in contrast to her previous works. ``I'm just not interested in sex and violence,'' she said. 
Harold ``Happy'' Traum can help you learn to play a musical instrument without being lectured about practicing. And you don't even have to leave home. Traum and his wife run a mail-order business known as Homespun Tapes. They produce audio and video tapes of instructional music lessons featuring top musicians as instructors. In 20 years of business, they've sold hundreds of thousands of such tapes to aspiring musicians around the world. ``We've sent tapes to just about any country you can name: Malaysia, lots of African countries, Japan. And we get letters from people in Poland, Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union who say they can't send money. They send us items in exchange like a crystal vase,'' Traum said. Each of the 60- and 90-minute tapes feature one of the 50 musicians who are teachers. The Who's John Entwistle teaches electric bass. Chet Atkins teaches country guitar. Livingston Taylor teaches acoustic guitar and Clarence ``Gatemouth'' Brown teaches blues guitar. For blues harmonica, the teacher is John Sebastian, formerly of the Lovin' Spoonful. Other lessons teach fiddle, banjo, mandolin, autoharp, dulcimer, flute, keyboards and synthesizer. Altogether, more than 400 tapes have been done. Tapes are categorized according to level: beginning, easy intermediate, intermediate and advanced intermediate. Most audio tapes are $12.95, or $65 for a series of six. Video tapes, added about seven years ago, cost $49.95 and $59.95. There's just about every kind of music imaginable, with one exception. ``We're not interested in heavy metal,'' the 50-year-old Traum said during a visit to Nashville for a taping session. The Traums live in Woodstock, N.Y. Traum, who teaches guitar and banjo himself on the tapes, says learning to play this way has several benefits. ``You can't get (personal) lessons from these people: They are the best in the world,'' he said. ``You can rewind and play as much as you want. They don't get mad at you if you don't practice. ``Lots of adults don't like to go to a teacher because of a bad childhood experience or maybe their schedule doesn't permit it. This way, you can come home from work or get up in the morning and put a tape on. ``It does not have the personal contact that a human teacher has, so I would say that people should take lessons from a real teacher as well if they can. But these tapes are the closest you can get to that. We try hard to make these personal. Our name suggests that.'' He says the tapes also are a bargain because one hour of personal music instruction could range anywhere from $15 to $50. ``Any one-hour video gives the average student five or six lessons and several weeks or even months of practicing,'' Traum says. He says the results depend on the individual. ``I can't make a talented person out of an untalented one. But if you have the dedication, there's no limit, especially if you supplement it by going to listen to a professional or forming a band. You don't get better in a vacuum.'' Traum got started in the mail order business after making tapes for his guitar students. ``It was a kitchen table operation for two years,'' he recalled. ``When dinner time came, we cleared the tapes off and set the table for the kids.'' Today, his business has a staff of eight and a mailing list of about 30,000. Sales of audio tapes outnumber the videos by 2-to-1, but he figures it will be even soon. ``We're geared to the teens on up,'' he said. ``We have a lot of senior citizens with time on their hands. They have a fiddle collecting dust in the attic and they want to put it to use. ``Some people have been buying the tapes as long as we've been in business. We know their names by heart. Every few months, we hear from them so we know people do progress. ``We send questionnaires to all those on the mailing list,'' he said. ``We hear how the lessons have changed their lives and how they've gotten in a band and so forth. It makes us feel like we're doing something right.'' 
The nation's economy closed 1988 on a vigorous note, as December increases in the rates of production and new orders were the highest since July, according to a survey of corporate purchasing executives. The National Association of Purchasing Management's Business Survey Committee said in a report for release today that its Purchasing Managers' Index increased to 58.1 percent in December, compared with 56.6 percent in November. The December figure was the highest since July's 59 percent. A reading above 50 percent indicates that the economy is generally expanding; below 50, that it is generally declining. 
Consumers' confidence about the state of the economy increased in December, boosted by low inflation, low unemployment and growth in personal income, a business-financed research organization reported. The Conference Board's Consumer Confidence Index increased to 119.8, up nearly 7 points from November, the board said in a report for release today. The index had declined in November to 113.1 from October's figure of 116.9. 
Federal regulators rescued a post-Depression record 217 savings institutions in 1988, leaving Congress and President-elect Bush to figure out the best way to pay the $38 billion bill. Theoretically, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, which regulates the S&amp;L industry, expects enough income over the next 30 years _ $45 billion to $50 billion _ to cover the cost. But analysts and many members of Congress say regulators have run up such a huge bill that turning to the taxpayer is inevitable. Bank Board Chairman M. Danny Wall announced a number of last-minute deals late Friday. 
The Commerce Department reported that its chief economic forecasting gauge edged down 0.2 percent in November, continuing a sawtooth pattern that analysts said portends a slowdown but no recession in 1989. The sluggishness in the department's Index of Leading Economic Indicators announced Friday was viewed as good news by some experts, who said it should ease fears that the economy was growing at a pace threatening new inflation. 
Sales of new homes, hurt by a big slump in activity in the Northeast, declined by 8 percent in November, the largest setback in 18 months, the government reported. The Commerce Department said Friday that new single-family homes were sold at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 671,000 units last month, down from a revised October sales rate of 729,000 units. The November decline was the second in the past three months and the sharpest since an 11.6 percent decrease in May 1987. Sales rose 4.4 percent in October. 
Prices farmers get for raw products are ending 1988 on an upbeat note, averaging about 14 percent more in December than they did a year ago, the Agriculture Department said. The department's Agricultural Statistics Board said in its final report of the year Friday that preliminary figures showed prices rose an average of 0.7 percent from November to December. 
Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. Inc. took the No. 1 spot in domestic securities underwriting in 1988, ending the five-year reign of Salomon Brothers Inc. in that position, according to a company that follows the industry. Merrill Lynch's total underwritings for the year were $39.7 billion, or 14.5 percent of the $273 billion overall total brought to market in 1988, according to a report Friday from IDD Information Services. Second overall was Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co., with $36.9 billion, while Salomon Brothers Inc. _ which held the top spot for the previous five years _ slipped to third place at $33.9 billion, IDD said. 
Cable television systems are offering more channels to more viewers, but the price for watching is also going up. The Consumer Price Index for the 12 months through November shows that cable TV bills for urban viewers rose 13.3 percent, figures showed Friday, while the overall index rose 4.2 percent during the period. The cable increase during the previous year was 6.85 percent. 
The Reagan administration did not adequately study the protections needed for migratory wildlife before adopting a plan last year for offshore oil and gas leasing through 1992, a federal appeals court ruled. The U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals said Friday that the Interior Department ``failed to perform an adequate analysis of the cumulative impacts of the program on migratory species.'' It ordered the department to try again, though the ruling does not immediately impede the leasing. 
Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., which has agreed to a plea deal to settle securities fraud charges, has been barred by New York City from the sale of $500 million in municipal bonds. The announcement Friday came one day after a federal judge in Boston stalled a Drexel-financed $970 million takeover effort of Prime Computer Inc. because of the deal. Drexel, one of the most profitable Wall Street firms, was to have been one of 16 participants in the New York City bond sale, tentatively scheduled for February. The city is one of the biggest issuers of municipal bonds. 
Mercedes-Benz has paid a record $20.2 million fine because its 1986 cars guzzled too much gasoline, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said. The luxury German automaker was fined because the 86,020 cars it sold in the United States in the 1986 model year fell 4.7 miles per gallon short of meeting that year's required fleet average minimum mileage, 26.0 mpg, agency spokesman Tim Hurd said Friday. 
The stock market finished mixed on Friday, as the Dow Jones average of 30 industrials fell 14.11 to 2,168.57 while three issues rose for every two that fell in overall tally in the New York Stock Exchange. The dollar slipped against most major currencies in abbreviated trading. Bond prices rose slightly. Soybean futures prices surged to a 10-week high on the Chicago Board of Trade; energy futures rose sharply; precious metals were higher; livestock and meat futures were mixed; and stock-index futures retreated. 
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari called for unity behind his efforts to negotiate a reduction in Mexico's foreign debt servicing burden. ``Whoever doesn't contribute to the debt negotiations will really be attacking the unity of the nation, so necessary at this hour, and playing the game of our creditors,'' Salinas said Monday, in a New Year's message to the armed forces. ``It's a matter of everyone doing their part so that united we can negotiate in the best conditions,'' Salinas said. Salinas said his government will seek up to $7 billion in new foreign credits and a reduction in servicing payments on Mexico's $106 billion foreign debt when restructuring negotiations with creditor banks begin this year. Congress on Dec. 23 authorized the government to borrow up to $10.5 billion from abroad in 1989. 
Poor attitudes, not poor working conditions, are the reasons many frustrated employees consider a job change, a Central Michigan University researcher said. The findings, released on Monday, stem from a two-year study of workers at five Michigan companies, said Terry Beehr, a psychology professor at the university. Small changes in the workplace probably won't satisfy employees who carry their old restlessness to a new job, Beehr said. ``People who see one job as stressful are prone to seeing all jobs as stressful,'' he said. ``Even when jobs are substantially different, people tend to hold the same kinds of attitudes about them. Some people are more prone to complaining than others and will complain regardless of objective reality.'' The study, funded by the U.S. Department of Labor, also found that workers who stay on the job despite their frustrations report better experiences than those who leave for other positions. Beehr and two University of Arkansas psychologists, Nina Gupta and Douglas Jenkins, studied a mixed sample of 211 blue-collar and white-collar Michigan workers at two automotive supply companies, a research and development company, a printing business and the service departments of a large hospital. Most workers experienced an initial satisfaction with their new jobs, but in many cases, the happiness quickly faded, Beehr said. ``By the time we did our follow-up interviews about a year and a half later, the honeymoon was over,'' he said. ``Their encounter with reality drives down those heightened expectations, and the emptiness of unmet expectations takes over. People begin to feel negative about their new jobs.'' Those who remained happy with their job changes had taken new positions with tangible benefits such as a higher salary or a better chance for promotion, he said. The study suggests that disgruntled workers should examine their reasons for leaving before they resign and avoid unrealistic expectations about new jobs, Beehr said. ``I would just caution them to make sure the job isn't any worse in any way, including non-work factors such as location,'' he said. ``If every factor looks at least as good as your current job, go ahead. But don't expect you'll be elated by the new job. It probably won't happen. If it does, it won't last long.'' 
Stock prices began the year on a down note today as Wall Street focused on the continuing specter of higher interest rates. The Dow Jones average of 30 industrials was off 6.43 to 2,162.14 as of 10 a.m. EST. Declining issues were ahead of advancers by a margin of about 5-to-4, with 415 stocks up, 533 down and 556 unchanged on the New York Stock Exchange. Big Board volume totaled 17.82 million shares after the first half-hour of trading. Larry Wachtel, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., said today's early decline was due in part to an ``overextension of the blue chips.'' However, he said, the main problem on Wall Street was traders' continuing concerns about interest rates. Those concerns were fueled in part by a survey by the National Association of Purchasing Management that indicated the economy remains robust, Wachtel said. With the economy running at a strong clip, the financial markets expect the Federal Reserve to raise its discount rate. ``There's no sign of a rate peak,'' Wachtel said. Traders were looking toward Friday's release of employment data for December for further clues about the Fed's intentions, he said. Declines in the dollar and Treasury bond prices today also contributed to the decline on Wall Street, analysts said. The most actively-traded issue on the NYSE was Philips Petroleum, up [ at 19|. IBM was up \ at 122[, General Electric was off \ at 44{ and Ford Motor was down [ at 50]. The NYSE's composite index of all its listed stocks was off 0.54 at 155.72. On the American Stock Exchange, the market value index was unchanged at 306.01. On Friday, the Dow Jones industrial average lost 14.11 points to close at 2,168.57. That left the market's best-known barometer with a decline of 0.36 for the week, but a gain of 229.74 points, or 11.85 percent, for the year. Advancing issues outnumbered declines by about 3 to 2 in nationwide trading of New York Stock Exchange-listed stocks, with 945 up, 594 down and 466 unchanged. Volume on the floor of the Big Board came to 127.21 million shares, down from 131.29 million in Thursday's session. 
To the associate who turned him in, Kevin David Mitnick is a ``big, fat slob'' obsessed with fast food and breaking into computer systems. To the authorities holding him without bail, the 25-year-old Los Angeles man is an expert hacker who calls himself Condor and is so dangerous he must never be allowed to use even a telephone without supervision. ``He is truly a threat to society, someone who uses computers to act out personal vendettas against people,'' said Jim Black, a computer crime specialist with the Police Department. ``The bottom line with Kevin is that if you have a job, pay a gas bill, use a phone or drive a car he can find you and ruin you electronically,'' Black said in a telephone interview. ``If he wasn't in jail, he could be listening to us right this minute.' Mitnick was being held today in a maximum-security cell at the federal Metropolitan Detention Center. A federal grand jury indicted him Dec. 20 on computer fraud charges, accusing him of using unauthorized MCI long-distance codes to tap into computers at Leeds University in England and the University of Southern California and causing $4 million damage to a Digital Equipment Corp. computer system. Mitnick will plead innocent, said his attorney, Alan Rubin. ``We will also try to get bail set,'' Rubin said. ``I am shocked and astonished that my client is being held without bail and in solitary confinement. This thing has been blown completely out of proportion.'' Longtime associate Leonard DiCicco, 23, of Calabasas, said he reported Mitnick's activities to authorities because Mitnick had been threatening him. ``He was using DEC computers where I work and threatening that we would both go down if I said anything,'' said DiCicco, who faces no charges in the inquiry. ``He has no sense of right or wrong and no respect for anyone else's privacy,'' DiCicco said. ``I was beside him through all this hacking and it's scary to think of the things he is capable of.'' ``He could pick apart almost any computer system in the United States,'' Black said. ``There are probably only a handful of computer specialists with his capabilities.'' In his electronic activities, the 5-11, 240-pound Mitnick referred to himself as Condor, Black said. DiCicco said Mitnick named himself for Robert Redford's character's code name in the spy movie ``Three Days of the Condor.'' ``All he did was eat Fat Burgers, drink Slurpees and work on computers,'' DiCicco said. ``He was a big, fat slob of a guy who couldn't get through a day without breaking into a computer somewhere.'' Mitnick began his hacking career using telephones, authorities said. By age 13, he was under investigation by the police department, Pacific Bell telephone company and the Federal Communications Commission, the Los Angeles Daily News said Monday. ``Mitnick was a legend to the computer world by 1981,'' said John Christ, his high school computer teacher. In 1982, DiCicco said, he and Mitnick used USC's 24-hour student computer lab to get into many computers, including classified systems. ``Our favorite was the National Security Agency computer because it was supposed to be so confidential,'' DiCicco said. ``It was like a big playground once you got into it.'' 
Stock prices moved lower today as Wall Street began the new year weighed down by interest rate concerns. The Dow Jones average of 30 industrials was off 14.11 to 2,154.46 as of 11 a.m. EST. Declining issues were ahead of advancers by a margin of about 7-to-5, with 481 stocks up, 741 down and 522 unchanged on the New York Stock Exchange. Big Board volume totaled 41.57 million shares after the first 90 minutes of trading. Michael Metz, a market analyst with Oppenheimer &amp; Co., said traders were selling amid fears that interest rates would continue to rise. Those fears were fueled by soaring yields in the credit markets. The interest rate on the Treasury's bellwether 30-year issue surged to 9.09 percent today from 8.98 percent late Friday. The dollar was down on foreign exchange markets, adding to the concerns on Wall Street, Metz said. Traders feared the Federal Reserve would step in to support the U.S. currency by raising interest rates, he said. Larry Wachtel, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., said the interest rate worries were also heightened by a survey by the National Association of Purchasing Management that indicated the economy remains robust. With the economy running at a strong clip, the financial markets expect the Fed to raise its discount rate. ``There's no sign of a rate peak,'' Wachtel said. Traders were looking toard Friday's release of employment data for December for further clues about the Fed's intentions, he said. The most actively-traded issue on the NYSE was Exxon, down { to 43{. IBM was unchanged at 121~, General Electric was off ] at 44] and Procter &amp; Gamble was down 1[ to 85~. The NYSE's composite index of all its listed stocks was off 0.81 at 155.45. On the American Stock Exchange, the market value index was down 0.37 at 305.64. 
President elect Carlos Andres Perez said Venezuela declared a moratorium on its foreign bank debt because the country has nearly run out of foreign reserves, newspapers reported Tuesday. ``The reality is clear, our operative international reserves are exhausted and given this situation the government cannot fulfill its debt commitments,'' said Perez, who will be inaugurated Feb. 2. He did not estimate the level of foreign reserves, nor has the government or Central Bank released any official figures in recent months. But according to private estimates published Tuesday, foreign reserves in the Central Bank fell to around $6 billion dollars at the end of 1988, including just $54 million dollars in cash. Perez left Tuesday for talks this week with the presidents of Mexico and Brazil about ``regional concerns'' which include the Latin American debt problem. One of Perez' main goals is to get Latin debtors to join forces in pressuring creditors for debt relief. Brazil, Mexico and Venezuela are three of the biggest debtors. Perez said he would be meeting with International Monetary Fund Director Michel Camdessus during a financial conference in Davos, Switzerland starting Jan. 28. ``This will be important for saying definitive things about the foreign debt,'' Perez said. Outgoing president Jaime Lusinchi announced the debt moratorium, effective Jan. 17, and the startup of new debt refinancing talks in his annual New Year's address. A financial team is scheduled to visit New York on Jan. 12 to initiate contacts with the nation's Bank Advisory Committee, according to Finance Vice-Minister Eglee Iturbe de Blanco. The team will discuss a refinancing plan for around $21 billion of foreign commercial bank debt, which includes the unpaid portion of a $20.34 billion refinancing pact signed in 1987 and around $2 billion of debt not included in that pact. Venezuela's total foreign debt is about $33 billion. 
A Nuclear Regulatory Commission panel has conditionally approved the New Hampshire portion of the emergency plan for the Seabrook nuclear power plant, saying it does not believe area teachers' claims they would abandon their pupils in an atomic emergency. In a 290-page decision dated Friday and released today, a panel of three administrative law judges said there is ``reasonable assurance that adequate protective measures can and will be taken within the New Hampshire portion'' of a 10-mile evacuation zone around the plant. Part of the zone lies in Massachusetts, which has refused to cooperate in the planning for an evacuation. The plant's operator, Public Service Co. of New Hampshire, has submitted a plan for Massachusetts communities. But the Atomic Safety and Licensing Board panel of law judges has yet to hold a hearing on it. A recent order from President Reagan gave the Federal Emergency Management Agency authority to draw up a plan and operate it if a state refuses to take part. Today's approval was conditioned on several paperwork tasks and resolving a traffic issue the board said had not been considered _ workers in the area going home before they begin evacuating the area. The board said it would seek advice from various groups on how to deal with that issue but added that ``the omission of the commuter trips to home will not have a large effect'' on the plan. Several local officials, including teachers, had testified at board hearings they would abandon their jobs or pupils in favor of taking care of their own families rather than carry out duties assigned to them in the evacuation plan. ``The board does not accept the implied conclusion of the teachers' testimony that virtually all of the teachers in the (10-mile zone) will abruptly abandon their pupils without even pausing to account for them and seeing them to a school bus...,'' the law judges said. ``While we would not expect heroic behavior from all of the teachers, neither would we accept panic from all of them,'' the licensing board said. The law judges found the teachers' testimony ``perplexing'' and said it ``does not represent traditional American values and history.'' ``Where those relied upon to respond in an emergency know that they have a role, and are trained to that role, as a group they will not fail their communities,'' the board opined. The $5.7 billion Seabrook plant was completed two years ago but has been idle because of the dispute over the evacuation plan. The commission has said it will grant a low-power testing license as soon as Public Service Co. can present evidence that it would be able to pay for closing and decommissioning he plant once its components become radioactive. The company, which is operating under the protection of bankruptcy courts, has said it expects to satisfy that requirement in a few weeks. 
Grain and soybean futures opened mostly higher today on the Chicago Board of Trade, buoyed by bullish weather developments and the government's offer to subsidize more wheat sales to China. The Agriculture Department announced Friday that it had targeted China for additional sales of 1 million metric tons of U.S. wheat at subsidized prices under the Export Enhancement Program. Late last week, the National Weather Service issued a 90-day outlook predicting drier-than-normal conditions in the major U.S. winter wheat region through March, another positive factor for wheat prices, analysts said. Hot, dry conditions in the South American soybean belt _ particularly in Argentina _ gave the soybean market an early boost, said Walter Spilka, a grain-market analyst with Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co. in New York. ``Over the weekend, Brazil had some spotty rains _ nothing of significance _ and Argentina was pretty much dry the entire weekend, and hot,'' he said. Corn prices rose in sympathy with the other markets, he said. In early trading, wheat was 3\ cents to 4{ cents higher with the contract for delivery in March at $4.43{ a bushel; corn was unchanged to 1 cent higher with March at $2.85\ a bushel; oats were 3 cents to 7\ cents higher with March at $2.48{ a bushel; soybeans were 3{ cents lower to 3} cents higher with January at $8.08 a bushel. Livestock and meat futures were lower in early trading on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. Live cattle were .10 cent to .30 cent lower with February at 73.72 cents a pound; feeder cattle were .32 cent to .45 cent lower with January at 83.70 cents a pound; live hogs were .20 cent to .40 cent lower with February at 46.30 cents a pound; frozen pork bellies were .65 cent to .95 cent lower with February at 42.40 cents a pound. Livestock and meat futures settled narrowly mixed on Friday. 
The Sun-Times Co., publisher of the Chicago Sun-Times, announced today it has signed a definitive agreement to acquire Pioneer Press from Field Corp. Terms of the agreement were not disclosed. Pioneer publishes 38 weekly newspapers, including the Evanston Review and Oak Leaves (Oak Park), and covers more than 79 communities. It has a combined weekly paid circulation in excess of 170,000. ``This is a significant step in the Sun-Times' commitment to serving the Chicago metropolitan community,'' said Sun-Times Chairman Leonard P. Shaykin. ``We are building for the future,'' said acting publisher Charles T. Price, ``and the acquisition of Pioneer Newspapers is one more sign of this strong commitment.'' He said the move gives Sun-Times-owned newspapers access to more than 32 percent of the metropolitan area's households. ``In the affluent northern section of the metropolitan area, Pioneer has a household penetration in excess of 65 percent,'' said Price. The Sun-Times also recently bought the Star Publications, 18 twice-weekly suburban newspapers covering 49 communities in the southwestern suburbs. The Sun-Times, with a daily circulation of more than 2 million, is owned by an investor group led by the New York investment firm of Adler &amp; Shaykin. 
The new year began on a sour note on Wall Street today as the prospect of higher interest rates brought stock prices lower. The Dow Jones average of 30 industrials was off 20.53 to 2,148.04 as of noon EST. Declining issues were ahead of advancers by a margin of about 8-to-5, with 491 stocks up, 852 down and 481 unchanged on the New York Stock Exchange. Big Board volume totaled 59.83 million shares at midday. Analysts said interest rate worries and program selling combined to bring the market down. The interest rate concerns were fueled by soaring yields in the credit markets. The rate on the Treasury's bellwether 30-year issue surged to 9.09 percent today from 8.98 percent late Friday. The dollar was down on foreign exchange markets, adding to the concerns of Wall Street players, said Michael Metz, a market analyst with Oppenheimer &amp; Co. Traders feared the Federal Reserve would step in to support the U.S. currency by raising interest rates, he said. Larry Wachtel, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., said the interest rate worries were also heightened by a survey by the National Association of Purchasing Management that indicated the economy remains robust. With the economy running at a strong clip, financial markets expected the Fed to raise its discount rate, the interest it charges its member banks. ``There's no sign of a rate peak,'' Wachtel said. Analysts said traders were looking toward Friday's release of employment data for December for further clues about the Fed's intentions. The most actively-traded issue on the NYSE today AT&amp;T, down \ to 28{. Among other most-active stocks, IBM was down [ at 121}, General Electric was off { at 44\ and Exxon was down ] to 43|. Big decliners included Boeing, off 1] to 59\, Procter and Gamble, down 1{ to 85{, and UAL, off 2\ to 107\. Gaining issues included Reebok, up [ to 12], and Digital Equipment, up | to 99. The NYSE's composite index of all its listed stocks was off 1.08 at 155.18. On the American Stock Exchange, the market value index was down 0.49 at 305.52. 
MCorp continues to get close looks from potential bidders and newspaper reports say that Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Co. is the latest to begin reviewing the Dallas firm's records. MCorp senior vice president for corporate affairs, George A. McCane, today told The Associated Press the company is obligated after seeking FDIC assistance to allow potential bidders to review the troubled bank holding company's records. But he said the company has no intention of revealing who those interested parties are. ``I'm not going to go into any detail about who might have been in or who might be coming in,'' McCane said. The teams of outsiders combing through the company's financial records to establish what kind of bid, if any, their company should make have not been particularly distracting although MCorp hopes to convince federal regulators that it can bring itself out of financial difficulty with a little help, McCane said. ``The thing people are focusing on within the company is taking care of their customers,'' McCane said. ``Addressing the needs and concerns of customers _ that keeps people busy.'' Newspaper reports say a team of analysts from Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Co. moved in last week to begin reviewing MCorp's records. The New York-based firm won a bidding war for RJR Nabisco Inc. about a month ago. The Wall Street Journal, citing undisclosed sources, reported Tuesday that KKR has assembled a war chest of $5 million to $6 million and will use part of it to gain a major stake in the financial industry. Another potential bidder, Wells Fargo &amp; Co., recently moved a 50-member team out of the building. Besides Wells Fargo, several other large banks are thought to be eyeing MCorp, including Citicorp. of New York, the Journal said. But MCorp, which has $20.1 billion in assets to stand as the second-largest bank holding company in Texas, remains confident that it can convince federal regulators that it can bail itself out of trouble with a little help from the government and a few outside investors. ``We feel good about the proposal we are putting together,'' McCane said. 
A federal judge has barred Toyota Motor Corp. from using the Lexus name for its new line of luxury cars on grounds that the name could infringe on the Lexis trademark used by Mead Data Central Inc. for its computerized data-retrieval service. The ruling Friday by U.S. District Judge David N. Edelstein came in a lawsuit filed by Mead against the Japanese carmaker and its U.S. affiliate, Toyota Motor Sales, U.S.A., Inc., Mead said in a statement today. On Monday, Toyota obtained a temporary, emergency stay of Edelstein's injunction, Mead said. On Thursday, a panel of the 2nd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals is expected to hear arguments on whether the stay should be extended, said Mead, which is based in Dayton, Ohio. If the stay is not extended, Toyota will be prohibited from using the Lexus name when exhibiting its new car line at the Detroit and Los Angeles automobile shows, which open Saturday, Mead said. Edelstein's ruling came under a New York law that entitles a trademark owner to relief if it can demonstrate that the quality of its trademark is likely to be diluted by another company's use of the same or similar trademark. Edelstein gave Toyota five days to accept an alternate order that would permit it to use the Lexus name provided it meets certain conditions, including making payments to Mead to enable the company to preserve the distinctiveness of its Lexis trademark and clearly indicating in ads that the car line is not connected with Mead or its Lexis data-retrieval product. Toyota Motor Sales spokesman Jim Olson said today that he could not comment on whether the company would accept the alternate order. But the official launch of the car line, scheduled for Thursday in Detroit, would go ahead as planned despite the lawsuit, he added in an interview from the company's Torrance, Calif., headquarters. Toyota unveiled the Lexus line last month, and said it planned to have the Japanese cars in U.S. showrooms in September. The cars represent a move to the high end of the car market for Toyota, which established its reputation as a maker of high-quality, moderately priced vehicles. Toyota said the Lexus line, which consists of two models, is intended to compete with Mercedes-Benz and other luxury cars. The move mirrors that by other Japanese carmakers, which also are entering the luxury car market. The Lexus models will cost $20,000 to $35,000, and will be sold through a separate dealer network, the company said. 
Share prices closed near their intra-day lows Tuesday as a drop on Wall Street and a weaker dollar cast a shadow over the London market's first trading session of 1989. Traders expressed disappointment about the generally thin trading volumes, since many participants had hoped for renewed institutional interest in the market as the Christmas and New Year holiday season came to an end. The Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100 index closed down 10.3 points at 1,782.8, near the day's low of 1,782.4, off 10.7, which came soon after the official 9 a.m. market opening. The market was briefly enlivened in the afternoon by news that British Petroleum Co. plans to buy back a large slice of the 22 percent BP stake owned by the Kuwait Investment Office, the London-based investment arm of the Kuwait government. The announcement was made at the same time that British Petroleum and RTZ Corp. announced a price tag of $4.32 billion for the minerals assets that BP is selling to RTZ in the largest private deal ever concluded between two British firms. The news provoked rises in BP and RTZ share prices and generated better than average trading volumes in the two stocks. The market managed a brief rally around midday, reaching an intra-day peak of 1,790.7, off 2.4 points, before plunging lower again during the afternoon. The narrower Financial Times 30-share index closed 7.5 points lower at 1,447.8. Volume was a modest 323.8 million shares, down from 377.3 million shares on Thursday, the last full-day trading session. 
Everything you've heard and read about the linkage between the budget deficit and the trade deficit is wrong. Federal budget deficits are not responsible for pushing up the trade deficit. Raising taxes or cutting spending will not do anything to cure America's trade problems. This, at least, is the contention of Peter L. Bernstein, an economist and forecaster who admits he is in a minority. A rather small minority, in fact. ``I agree with very few people,'' Bernstein, who runs a New York-based consulting firm, said in an interview this week. ``Frankly, I think his ideas are nonsense,'' agreed David Wyss, a mainstream financial economist at Data Resources Inc. in Lexington, Mass. Bernstein may indeed be wrong, but he is worth listening to because he is raising the right questions. He is certainly right that cutting the budget deficit is no cure-all. ``It leads to belief in a quick fix _ if we raise taxes a little bit and cut spending a little bit, the terrible hemorrhage (in trade) will take care of itself,'' Bernstein said. Conventional wisdom says budget deficits create a shortage of national savings and push up interest rates. High interest rates attract foreign investors, who compete to invest in dollars. The foreign demand for dollars pushes up the exchange rate, so American products are expensive overseas and foreign products are cheap in the United States. The result: shrinking exports, growing imports and a trade deficit. It's indisputable that a savings shortfall and a trade deficit occur simultaneously. That's necessarily true by accounting rules. But Bernstein questions whether the one causes the other. In fact, he suggests, it may be that the trade deficit is causing the budget deficit and the overall savings shortfall. The idea is that the trade deficit depresses the national income, holding down the government's tax revenue and resulting in a budget deficit. Bernstein makes one telling point: In the mid-1980s, economists were saying the dollar was high because the budget deficit was so big. Now they say the dollar is low because the budget deficit is so big. Any piece of conventional wisdom that purports to explain diametrically opposite results deserves closer scrutiny than it usually gets. Bernstein produces charts showing no statistically significant correlation between countries that have big budget deficits and countries that have big trade deficits. Britain, for example, is running budget surpluses and trade deficits. Canada has a big budget deficit and often runs trade surpluses. Conventional economists respond that Bernstein is ignoring the role of private savings. Countries like Japan and West Germany can afford to run federal budget deficits because they have big pools of private savings to borrow from, Wyss said. In contrast, the United States needs to exercise budgetary restraint because the pool of private savings is small. Americans aren't likely to start saving more, Wyss said, so to balance its trade account the United States must either cut its budget deficit or _ which is worse _ decrease investment. Even people who believe the budget deficit must be cut can agree with Bernstein that fiscal measures are not the final answer to America's persistent trade difficulties. ``Ultimately,'' Bernstein said in a recent paper, ``America's ailments all derive from the real economy and are only incidentally financial in origin.'' The United States needs to improve its productivity so that it can export products that the rest of the world wants _ and still afford to buy the imports that the rest of the world has to offer. ``Higher productivity does not come in neat packages, however,'' he said. ``It comes in thousands of different bits and pieces of education, motivation and innovation.'' 
Poultry producer Holly Farms Corp. said today it would fight a court ruling won by hostile suitor Tyson Foods Inc. that blocks Holly Farms from a friendly merger with ConAgra Corp. Holly Farms officers said in a statement that despite the ruling they would proceed as if the friendly merger will take place. Shareholders of both Holly Farms, a 100-year-old Memphis company, and ConAgra, based in Omaha, Neb., are scheduled to meet in separate sessions the first week of February to vote on the merger. Delaware Vice Chancellor Maurice Hartnett, ruling against the proposed deal on Friday in Wilmington, Del., reopened the door for Tyson Foods's hostile takeover attempt of Holly Farms. Tyson, of Springdale, Ark., is the nation's largest poultry processor and has been attempting to buy rival Holly Farms since Oct. 11. Tyson's lawsuit to halt the Holly Farms-ConAgra merger was heard in Delaware because both Holly Farms and Tyson are incorporated there. Hartnett ruled that provisions of the merger agreement did not serve the best interest of Holly Farms stockholders because it did not give them an opportunity to consider Tyson's offer. He enjoined Holly Farms and ConAgra from acting on a merger agreement they reached Nov. 17. ``The court's decision does not in any way affect our resolve to complete the transaction with ConAgra,'' Holly Farms president and chief executive officer R. Lee Taylor II said in the statement released Monday. ``Despite the court's findings, the board believes it acted properly ... in order to secure what was and continues to be the best available alternative for Holly Farms and its stockholders. We intend to pursue our proposed merger with ConAgra vigorously.'' Jim Blair, a lawyer for Tyson Foods, said he had hoped Holly Farms would open the bidding to Tyson as well as ConAgra following the court ruling in Delaware. ``A Holly Farms manager, in view of what the court now has said, ought to say since we're liberated from our obligations to ConAgra we would like to negotiate with both parties and get the best price we can get for our shareholders,'' Blair said. ``I don't understand why they're not doing that.'' Tyson Foods announced today it has extended its $54-a-share cash tender offer for all outstanding share of Holly Farms until 5 p.m. EST on Friday. Blair said Tyson officials will meet this week to see if that bid should be raised. Tyson's attempt to buy Holly Farms began with a friendly offer for about $900 million in cash or stock. When the Holly Farms board of directors rejected that offer, Tyson launched its hostile takeover attempt, going directly to Holly Farms shareholders with a $52-a-share offer. Holly Farms turned to a white knight, opting to sell the company to ConAgra in a stock swap valued at $1 billion. Tyson responded by offering shareholders $54 a share in cash for their Holly Farms stock, making the deal worth about $977 million. The financial markets were closed Monday because of the New Year's holiday. On Friday, Holly Farms shares closed at $55.625, up 50 cents, and ConAgra shares closed at $29, down 12.5 cents, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading. Tyson shares closed at $17.125, up 25 cents, in over-the-counter trading. 
The new year began on a sour note on Wall Street today as higher interest rates brought stock prices lower. The Dow Jones average of 30 industrials was off 34.46 to 2,134.11 as of 2 p.m. EST. Declining issues were ahead of advancers by a margin of about 2-to-1, with 493 stocks up, 1,008 down and 423 unchanged on the New York Stock Exchange. Big Board volume totaled 96.46 million shares at 2 p.m. EST. Analysts said interest rate worries and program selling combined to bring the market down. The interest rate concerns were fueled by soaring yields in the credit markets. The rate on the Treasury's bellwether 30-year issue surged to 9.09 percent today from 8.98 percent late Friday. The dollar was down on foreign exchange markets, adding to the concerns of Wall Street players, said Michael Metz, a market analyst with Oppenheimer &amp; Co. Traders feared the Federal Reserve would step in to support the U.S. currency by raising interest rates, he said. Larry Wachtel, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., said the interest rate worries were also heightened by a survey by the National Association of Purchasing Management that indicated the economy remains robust. With the economy running at a strong clip, financial markets expected the Fed to raise its discount rate, the interest it charges its member banks. ``There's no sign of a rate peak,'' Wachtel said. Analysts said traders were looking toward Friday's release of employment data for December for further clues about the Fed's intentions. The most actively traded issue on the NYSE today was AT&amp;T, down \ to 28{. Among other most-active stocks, IBM was down 1 at 120~, General Electric was off 1[ at 43| and Exxon was down } to 43\. The NYSE's composite index of all its listed stocks was off 1.83 at 154.43. On the American Stock Exchange, the market value index was down 1.10 at 304.91. 
The U.S. dollar was lower against the major currencies in European markets on Tuesday after a day of mainly trendless trading. Gold prices were higher. Foreign exchange dealers said it was a quiet start to the year and they expected the dollar could go lower under the influence of the expanding U.S. budget deficit. In London, where bank base lending rates are at a high 13 percent, a government assurance that the rate would be kept high to combat inflation drove the British pound up more than two cents. One pound cost $1.8270 in London late Tuesday from Friday's late $1.8062, the last trading day before the New Year holiday. Other late rates compared with Friday's late rates, included: 1.7620 West German marks, down from 1.7725; 1.4912 Swiss francs, down from 1.5025; 6.0125 French francs, down from 6.0600; 1.9870 Dutch guilders, down from 2.0020; 1,295.75 Italian lire, down from 1,305.25; 1.1900 Canadian dollars, down from 1.1927. Tokyo markets were closed for an extended New Year holiday. The dollar traded early in London at 123.80 Japanese yen and was lower late in the day at 123.50 yen. Gold bullion closed in London at a bid $411.75 a troy ounce, up from $410.05, and in Zurich at $411.25, up from $411.00. In Hong Kong, gold closed at $414.11, up from $413.41 Saturday. Silver bullion traded late in London at a bid $6.07 a troy ounce, up from $6.04. 
British Petroleum Co. PLC agreed Tuesday to sell off most of its mineral operations for $4.32 billion and, in a separate transaction, pay $3.57 billion to buy back more than half the 1.32 billion BP shares held by the government of Kuwait. RTZ Corp. PLC, a mining company with global interests, said it agreed to buy the mineral operations, which includes operations in the United States, Mexico, Brazil, Norway, Zimbabwe, South Africa, Australia, Papua New Guinea and Indonesia, for 2.4 billion pounds, or $4.32 billion. The sale includes BP's biggest U.S. asset, Bingham Canyon in Utah, one of the world's largest open pit gold and copper mines, Frank Fisher, BP's director of external affairs in Salt Lake City confirmed Tuesday. However, it does not include most of BP's Canadian mineral assets. The stock buy-back follows a British government order to the Kuwaitis last month to reduce their BP holdings from 21.68 percent to under 10 percent within three years. BP said it was buying 790 million shares from the Kuwait Investment Office, the London-based investment arm of the Kuwaiti government, for 1.95 billion pounds, the equivalent of $3.57 billion. The transaction is subject to approval by BP shareholders, the company said. The British government's order to the Kuwaitis came after a ruling in October by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission that the big Kuwaiti holding could ``operate against the public interest'' because of Kuwait's membership of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries. BP chairman Sir Peter Walters said Tuesday that allowing such a large stake in BP shares to remain in limbo ``for a period of up to three years isn't in the interests of the company or its shareholders.'' The Kuwait Investment Office built up its holding by buying partly paid BP stock in the months following the government's 7.2 billion pound, or $13.2 billion, public offering of BP shares in October 1987. The major sale by the Conservative government under its policy of privatization coincided with the stock market crash. The offering, which included the government's remaining 31.5 percent stake in BP, was seriously undersubscribed. BP will pay the Kuwaitis 305 pence each for their shares, compared with a purchase price of 287 pence. However, BP will effectively pay 247 pence a share because of tax credits. BP shares rose as high as 259 pence on Tuesday's announcements, and its partly paid shares gained 10 pence to 157.5 pence on the London Stock Exchange. Meanwhile, RTZ shares rose 7 pence to 424 pence. Walters said BP began negotiating the mineral sales in mid-1988, and said they were not undertaken to finance the share buy-back. The minerals transaction also covers the Canadian-based QIT, the world's leading producer of titanium dioxide; a 49 percent stake in Australia's Olympic Dam copper, uranium, gold and silver mines, and South Africa's Richards Bay Minerals, a top producer of titanium minerals, iron and zircon from beach sands. The BP assets involved had sales of $885.72 million and an operating profit of $329.4 million for the nine months ended Sept. 30. 
The new year began on a sour note on Wall Street today as higher interest rates brought stock prices lower in quiet trading. The Dow Jones average of 30 industrials was off 24.11 at 2,144.46 as of 3 p.m. EST. Declining issues were ahead of advancers by a margin of about 9-to-5, with 548 stocks up, 973 down and 428 unchanged on the New York Stock Exchange. Big Board volume totaled 112.63 million shares at 3 p.m. EST. Analysts said interest rate worries and program selling combined to bring the market down. The interest rate concerns were fueled by soaring yields in the credit markets. The rate on the Treasury's bellwether 30-year issue surged to 9.09 percent today from 8.98 percent late Friday. The dollar was down on foreign exchange markets, adding to the concerns of Wall Street players, said Michael Metz, a market analyst with Oppenheimer &amp; Co. Traders feared the Federal Reserve would step in to support the U.S. currency by raising interest rates, he said. Larry Wachtel, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., said the interest rate worries were also heightened by a survey by the National Association of Purchasing Management that indicated the economy remains robust. With the economy running at a strong clip, financial markets expected the Fed to raise its discount rate, the interest it charges its member banks. ``There's no sign of a rate peak,'' Wachtel said. Analysts said traders were looking toward Friday's release of employment data for December for further clues about the Fed's intentions. Among actively traded stocks, IBM was down } at 121[, General Electric was off } at 44, AT&amp;T was down [ at 28|, Exxon was down } to 43\, and RJR Nabisco was down 1 at 90[. The NYSE's composite index of all its listed stocks was off 1.37 at 154.89. On the American Stock Exchange, the market value index was down 0.91 at 305.10. 
Tree International Publishing said Tuesday CBS Records met all of its conditions when it agreed this week to buy the world's largest country music publisher. New York-based CBS Records, the world's largest record company, is buying Tree for a reported $45 million to $50 million. ``If offers us many, many opportunities simply because CBS has the ability to commit so much money,'' longtime Tree owner Buddy Killen said Tuesday. ``Nothing changes but the cash flow.'' Killen would not disclose Monday's sale price. ``Tree belongs to Nashville, and I didn't want to let that change,'' Killen said. ``I wasn't going to settle until they agreed to all my prerequisites. That is, we had to stay in Nashville. We had to keep the name Tree International. We had to keep all our employees. And the headquarters had to be here.'' The sale is believed to be the largest financial transaction in the history of Nashville's Music Row. Killen, 52, will retain his title as president at the company and will become a CBS executive. Tree vice president Donna Hilley will be chief operating officer. CBS Records President Tommy Mottola called the sale ``a marriage of two highly compatible partners.'' ``It's fitting that country music's leading publisher be united under the same roof with the leading record company in the world,'' he said. ``The purchase of Tree International is CBS Records' first acquisition since becoming a wholly-owned subsidiary of Sony Corporation,'' Mottola said. ``It will provide us with a solid base upon which to build a significant music publishing entity.'' Tree has more than 22 employees, 40 exclusive songwriters and its own multi-story office building. The company has ranked as Billboard Magazine's No. 1 country music publisher for 16 consecutive years. Its catalog of music copyrights includes more than 35,000 songs, including the standards of Willie Nelson, Buck Owens, Merle Haggard, Harlan Howard and Roger Miller. The deal marks the end of an era for the Nashville music business. Song publishing was the area of the industry that had remained locally controlled. In the 1980s, such publishing companies as Acuff-Rose, Cedarwood, House of Gold and Combine Music went to out-of-town conglomerates. Tree was the last major publishing property that had not been acquired. CBS was purchased by Sony for a reported $2 billion in late 1987. But CBS's old song publishing division was purchased by SBK Entertainment World at that time. With the Tree purchase, Sony-CBS is re-entering the publishing field. CBS Records boasts such stars as Michael Jackson, Bruce Springsteen, Barbra Streisand and Willie Nelson. ``We want to be the biggest company around,'' Killen said. ``With CBS, now we can aggressively go after more acquisitions, more artists and more writers.'' 
European officials on Tuesday put finishing touches on a proposal to strike back at the United States in a trade dispute incited by a ban on American meat treated with growth hormones. Nico Wegter, a spokesman for the European Economic Community, said that by Thursday he expected representatives of the 12-nation trading bloc would be given a proposal for imposing higher duties on certain U.S. products. The plan would be offered to counter measures the United States put into effect Sunday to retaliate against the European meat ban. Approval of such a proposal would escalate a dispute that already threatens to become a serious trans-Atlantic commercial war, hurting a market in which two-way trade totaled an estimated $166 billion last year. The community's executive body, the European Commission, earlier vowed to slap higher duties on such U.S. imports as walnuts, honey, dried fruit and canned corn. Wegter said, ``The principle of retaliation on our part is already confirmed. It's already there. The only question is how we put that into practical terms.'' The final details and enforcement date of any such action would have to be approved by the member governments. American officials have raised the prospect of taking additional steps against any counter-measures imposed by the Europeans. Alfred Kingon, U.S. ambassador to the EEC, said last week, ``I think it's fair to say that you can anticipate further action on our side.'' The friction was touched off by the enforcement on Sunday of an EEC ban on imports of meat from cattle treated with growth hormones. The trading bloc, also known as the Common Market, wants to prohibit for health reasons all meat from such animals. ``Officially, there is no possibility of accepting meat coming from the United States that has been treated with hormones,'' Wegter told reporters. The ban is expected to block the importation of about $100 million worth of beef and beef byproducts from the United States, some of which are used in making pates and sausages. The measure exempts imports used to make pet food. U.S. officials contend the use of certain hormones to fatten cattle, a common practice among American farmers, does not pose a health risk. The prohibition was to have taken effect Jan. 1, 1988, but the trading bloc agreed to a one-year delay. It has since refused U.S. appeals for another postponement. In retaliation for the meat ban, the United States applied on Sunday trade sanctions worth about $100 million against European goods. The measures impose 100 percent duties on boneless beef, hams and pork shoulders, prepared or preserved tomatoes, instant coffee, fermented alcoholic beverages containing less than 7 percent alcohol by volume, certain fruit juices, and certain packaged pet food made from grains. U.S. Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter said last week that the EEC's ban on U.S. meat was an unfair trade practice and therefore justified the American retaliation. The additional tariffs are to remain in effect for the duration of the meat ban. But Wegter contended the U.S. retaliatory duties were not justified. ``We are entitled to have our own standards for the quality of our foodstuff,'' he said. ``If the Americans would like to breed with hormones, it's completely their affair,'' he said. ``The only thing we are asking is that to the extent they are exporting to us, they should certify that there is no breeding with hormones.'' EEC members could adopt the counter-measures against the United States later this week, Wegter said. But he added they also could refer the matter to key ministers scheduled to gather later in the month. Agriculture ministers from the 12 nations will meet Jan. 16 and foreign ministers on Jan. 23. Wegter said, ``We do not like the idea of having a trade war. ... The more things can be kept under control and kept in its own proportion the better it is.'' Wegter said that last fall, the EEC proposed settling the dispute by boosting imports of high-quality U.S. beef in return for American acceptance of the hormone ban. The offer, he said, was not accepted. EEC members are: France, West Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Belgium, the Netherlands, Denmark, Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain and the United Kingdom. 
Grain and soybean futures prices closed mixed Tuesday on the Chicago Board of Trade in a session that started on a high note, then faded on late profit-taking. ``We got a pullback today in a profit-taking reaction after the recent gains,'' said Walter Spilka, a grain-market analyst with Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co. in New York. Analysts linked the strong opening across the board to a continuation of Friday's late rally and to bullish developments on the weather and export fronts. The Agriculture Department targeted China on Friday for 1 million metric tons of U.S. wheat at subsidized prices, and rumors circulated Tuesday of new soybean meal sales to the Soviet Union. Meanwhile, the National Weather Service has predicted drier-than-normal conditions through March in the U.S. winter wheat region, and 100-plus-degree temperatures blistered the newly planted Argentine soybean crop during the weekend. At the close, wheat was 1{ cents lower to 1} cents higher with the contract for delivery in March at $4.39 a bushel; corn was \ cent to 3} cents lower with March at $2.81 a bushel; oats were 1{ cents to 2\ cents higher with March at $2.45\ a bushel; soybeans were 12 cents lower to } cent higher with Jawnuary at $8.04{ a bushel. 
Steel production totaled 99.19 million tons during 1988, a 13 percent rise from the previous year's 87.68 million tons, the American Iron and Steel Institute reported Tuesday. The industry's production amounted to 88.6 percent of capacity last year, compared with 78.2 percent in 1987. For the week ended Dec. 31, steel production fell to 1.710 million tons, down 4.2 percent from the previous week's 1.785 million tons, the institute said. Weekly production amounted to 79.8 percent of capacity, vs. 83.3 percent in the week of Dec. 24. Net tonnage by district for the final week of December: Northeast Coast, 244,000; Pittsburgh, 172,000; Youngstown, 61,000; Lake Erie, 103,000; Detroit, 171,000; Chicago, 473,000; Midwest, 171,000; Southern, 229,000; and Western, 86,000. 
President Reagan said Tuesday he has decided against any oil import fee or other action to curb oil imports but conceded that ``the free world will become increasingly dependent on oil supplies from potentially insecure sources.'' The president said he acted on the recommendation of Commerce Secretary C. William Verity who reported that import restrictions ``would not be cost effective and, in the long run, would impair rather than enhance national security.'' Verity's report was the outcome of an investigation requested in December, 1987, by the National Energy Security Committee, the president said. He said Verity concluded that ``there has been a substantial improvement in U.S. energy security'' since the last similar investigation in 1979. In a message to Congress that accompanied his statement, the president urged lawmakers to deregulate natural gas prices, permit expanded oil exploration in Alaska and the outer Continental Shelf and liberalize the depletion allowance for oil and gas producers. Reagan said that declining domestic oil production, rising oil imports and growing free world dependence on potentially insecure sources of supply raise a number of concerns, including vulnerability to a major supply disruption. ``The investigation found that the maintenance of U.S. access to sufficient supplies of petroleum is essential to our economic security, foreign policy flexibility and defense preparedness,'' he said. ``Given these factors, the secretary of commerce found that petroleum imports threaten to impair the national security.'' He said that, in deciding not to recommend any import restrictions, Verity took into account the administration's program to improve energy security. In particular, Reagan cited decontrol of oil prices and elimination of allocation controls as actions his administration has taken to strengthen the domestic oil industry. ``The Strategic Petroleum Reserve contains over 555 million barrels, compared to 108 million barrels eight years ago,'' he said. ``Today the nation is far less vulnerable to an oil supply disruption than in 1973 or 1979.'' Despite these improvements, important energy security concerns remain, the president said, citing rising oil consumption, declining U.S. crude production and rising oil imports. ``In addition, projections show that the free world will become increasingly dependent on oil supplies from potentially insecure sources.'' he said. The president also called on Congress to streamline nuclear power licensing procedures and sell the Naval Petroleum Reserves at Elk Hills, Calif., and Teapot Dome, Wyo. 
Transwestern Pipeline Co., a subsidiary of Houston-based Enron Corp., said Tuesday it has asked federal regulators for authority to reduce its rates for natural gas sales and transportation services by $9.9 million annually. The request to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission calls for the rate reduction to take effect Feb. 1. ``With this rate reduction, Transwestern will continue to maintain its competitive position,'' said Terence H. Thorn, president of Transwestern. The Tuesday general rate case filing deals with the non-gas portion of Transwestern's sales and transportation rates, the company said. The gas portion of the company's sales rate is set monthly through an adjustment proceeding. Transwestern operates a 4,439-mile natural gas pipeline beginning in West Texas and southern Oklahoma and extending to the California border. Enron Corp., with $9 billion in assets, operates the nation's largest natural gas transmission system, markets natural gas and gas liquids worldwide, operates a natural gas production company and is involved in cogeneration and independent power production. 
Stock prices fell in modest trading today on Wall Street as higher interest rates and a weaker dollar combined to get the new year off to a bad start. Interest rates jumped because of fears of inflation that were triggered by a report by the National Association of Purchasing Management, which said the nation's economy grew in December at its briskest rate in five months. The rate on the Treasury's bellwether 30-year issue surged to 9.08 percent today from 8.98 percent late Friday. The dollar was down on foreign exchange markets, adding to the concerns of Wall Street players, said Michael Metz, a market analyst with Oppenheimer &amp; Co. Traders feared the Federal Reserve would step in to support the U.S. currency by raising interest rates, he said. Analysts said traders were looking toward Friday's release of employment data for December for further clues about the Fed's intentions. 
The Ambassador Hotel, where Charlie Chaplin lived, Robert F. Kennedy died, Marion Davies rode a horse through the lobby, and generations of stars entertained at the Cocoanut Grove lounge, closed its doors Tuesday. The last guests bid farewell to the 68-year-old Wilshire Boulevard landmark, an imposing building on 23 lush acres now in disrepair. It was one of the city's first luxury hotels, its palm-lined property exemplifying the California lifestyle. Pictures of happier days line the corridors of the 350-room main building, but detracting from its elegant history now are peeling paint, worn rugs and stained wallpaper. The Ambassador was host to top personalities in its heyday, including Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and entertainers Elvis Presley, Elizabeth Taylor, Lena Horne, Harry Belafonte, Bing Crosby and Ray Charles. Miss Davies rode through the hotel lobby on horseback to amuse her lover, multimillionaire publisher William Randolph Hearst. The playground for yesteryear's elite abounds with such tales. Jack Benny proposed to Mary Livingston at the hotel, built on the site of Gottfried Schmidts' dairy farm. Marilyn Monroe modeled clothing during fashion shows, and for a half-century newspaper columnist Walter Winchell called the Ambassador home for much of the year. ``It's going to be a landmark I will always remember. There will nver be anything like it,'' said Roy Gardner, 72, a retired Inglewood plumbing contractor who roamed the lobby on its last day. Distance was calculated using the Ambassador, said Gardner. ``We would say a place or somebody's house was five miles from the Ambassador, like that,'' he said. But the glitz wore off the venerable hotel in the last few decades, as newer, more fashionable hotels opened downtown and on the city's Westside. The Ambassador, in the mid-Wilshire district between those areas, made few physical improvements, began losing money, and had been up for sale for three years. In May, the owners, the J. Myer Schine family, closed about three-quarters of the 500 rooms because they failed to meet fire standards, and more than $1 million was needed for earthquake-safety improvements. Maid Elvira Bell changed the sheets for the famous as well as the ordinary for 31 years. It was a party by ``Tiny Bubbles'' entertainer Don Ho, resulting in a hallway splashed with pineapple juice, that she remembers vividly. ``In those days, the music was so loud that it began to run you crazy,'' the 60-year-old woman said. ``Now I miss it. I have dropped tears when I see those singers on TV. ``They're getting so old and I wonder, `How about me?''' The hotel had been a well-known landmark for years before, thanks in part to its famous Cocoanut Grove nightclub, where such stars as Sammy Davis Jr., Nat ``King'' Cole and Bob Hope performed. The Ambassador dramatically came into the national limelight when New York Sen. Robert Kennedy was assassinated in the hotel pantry on June 6, 1968. He was shot to death by Sirhan Sirhan moments after declaring victory in California's Democratic presidential primary. The site's future is uncertain, with two companies negotiating to buy it, said hotel spokeswoman Margaret Burk. The estimated sale price has risen above $100 million, with preservation of some or all of the building possibly at issue. Burk's anecdotes include the time John Wayne was a guest. ``When John Wayne came, they said don't let any press in until he got to his room and put his toupee on,'' Ms. Burk said. Fearing developers would carve up the property and sell it off for commercial and residential ventures, the City Council voted in August 1987 to declare the Ambassador a historic monument. But the declaration expired after a year without a buyer being found. Despite its colorful history, there was no fanfare to mark its closing. Management decided against a party because people have known for two years that the hotel would be closing, Ms. Burk said. One visitor, Betty Szeden, who first set foot in the Ambassador 30 years ago as a model in a fashion show, came back Monday with her husband. ``It was sad and quiet last night,'' she said. ``But I'm glad to see it again.'' 
The dollar began the year Tuesday by skidding lower, largely because of pessimism about the U.S. trade deficit. A variety of factors were behind the dollar's decline, but most pointed to concerns about trade, analysts said. Jack Barbanel, an analyst with Gruntal &amp; Co., said the dollar was affected by comments by West German officials that the U.S. currency had reached its peak against the mark. Barbanel said the remarks led traders to believe ``the dollar was getting too strong too fast,'' and therefore set off selling. He said financial markets _ including foreign exchange traders _ also wanted to send a message to the incoming Bush administration that the problems of the U.S. budget and trade deficits must be dealt with. Jim McGroarty, a vice president with Discount Corp., said news of an increase in the West German trade surplus also fueled the dollar's decline. The U.S. government has seen a lower dollar as a means of reducing the U.S. trade deficit, so increases in the trade surpluses of other countries are taken by the markets as portending a drop in the dollar. The dollar also fell now that traders have completed their yearend position squaring, Barbanel said. The U.S. currency started its day on a down note overseas, and continued to fall in New York before regaining some ground. Barbanel attributed the late buying to technical market factors. In London, where bank base lending rates are at a high 13 percent, a government assurance that the rate would be kept high to combat inflation drove the British pound up more than 2 cents. One pound cost $1.8270 in London late Tuesday, up from Friday's late $1.8062, the last trading day before the New Year holiday. In New York, the pound rose to $1.8225 from late Friday's $1.8115. Other late dollar rates in New York, compared with late Friday's prices, included: 1.7670 West German marks, down from 1.7700; 1.49075 Swiss francs, down from 1.4995; 6.0340 French francs, down from 6.0480; 1,300.50 Italian lire, down from 1,306.00; and 1.19165 Canadian dollars, down from 1.19245. Other late dollar rates in Europe compared with Friday's late rates, included: 1.7620 West German marks, down from 1.7725; 1.4912 Swiss francs, down from 1.5025; 6.0125 French francs, down from 6.0600; 1.9870 Dutch guilders, down from 2.0020; 1,295.75 Italian lire, down from 1,305.25; 1.1900 Canadian dollars, down from 1.1927. Tokyo markets were closed for an extended New Year holiday. The dollar traded early in London at 123.80 Japanese yen and was lower late in the day at 123.50 yen. In New York, the dollar fell to 123.825 yen from late friday's 124.95. Gold prices were marginally higher. Republic National Bank of New York quoted a late bid of $411 for a troy ounce of gold, up from $410 late Friday. On the Commodity Exchange in New York, a troy ounce of gold rose to $410.80 from $410 on Friday. Gold closed in London at a bid $411.75 a troy ounce, up from $410.05, and in Zurich at $411.25, up from $411. In Hong Kong, gold closed at $414.11, up from $413.41 Saturday. Silver prices were mixed, slipping in New York after rising in London. Silver closed at $6.023 on the Commodity Exchange, down from $6.038 on Friday. In earlier London trading, the metal was quoted at a bid $6.07 a troy ounce, up from late Friday's $6.04. 
Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Co. would not confirm or deny reports Tuesday that it has been studying MCorp's books in a possible bid to buy Texas' second-largest bank holding company, but one source says the presence of the leveraged buyout firm is no secret. ``I've talked to people from within the bank that substantiate that they're doing due diligence,'' said Frank Anderson, an analyst for Stephens &amp; Co. ``They're looking over the books. We were all surprised when we found out KKR is involved.'' Several firms reportedly are interested in the Dallas-based firm. A report in Tuesday's editions of the Wall Street Journal said that a KKR team had quietly moved into MCorp's office tower in downtown Dallas last week. The newspaper said the team had moved in just as a 50-person team from Wells Fargo &amp; Co. of San Francisco departed. ``We're declining comment on that story altogether,'' said a spokesman for KKR, Ruth Packman of Keks &amp; Co. She said the company typically chooses to divulge no information until it makes a decision whether to try to acquire a company. George A. McCane, vice president of corporate affairs for MCorp. also said he could not say anything other than that the bank holding company is obligated by the FDIC to allow potential bidders to review its books. ``I'm not going to go into any detail about who might have been in or who might be coming in,'' McCane said. Ray Escamilla, a security officer at MCorp, said anyone reviewing records at the Dallas firm would be working in an area accessible only by magnetic cards and could not be reached for comment. An unidentified MCorp. employee who provides public information in the tower's lobby, said she was not even familiar with KKR. But Anderson said word that a KKR team had descended on the bank had spread rapidly and aroused much curiousity among other investors. ``Neither party is disclosing what they are up to,'' Anderson said. ``Are they looking at buying the institution themselves, or as part of a group, or possibly at strengthening management's bid by being an outsider investor?'' MCorp, which has $20.1 billion in assets, has said it intends to submit its own proposal for recapitalization of its troubled banks. ``We would expect it to be completed and presented at the same time other proposals are completed and presented,'' McCane said. When that period will be is not being disclosed by FDIC officials. FDIC spokesman Alan Whitney said Tuesday he could not say anything about the MCorp situation. ``All I can tell you is that the FDIC is addressing the MCorp situation,'' he said. Anderson said the investment community is watching the MCorp situation closely. He said other investors would probably follow a KKR lead if the New York firm steps into the banking industry. ``The investment community historically has had sort of a herd instinct,'' he said. Anderson said it would seem like an advantageous time for KKR to branch into the financial services industry if it desired. KKR just won a bidding war for RJR Nabisco Inc. ``It's probably a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to get in, especially in the Southwest, where you can have the government as your partner,'' Anderson said. ``It's a real opportunity, if you can structure the deal so that it cushions your downside. I doubt this opportunity will ever present itself again.'' Anderson said that just the chance to browse through the MCorp records also provides an unprecedented opportunity. ``If you wanted to get a good idea of what the Southwest really looked like, what better medium could you use,'' he said, noting that MCorp has banks in all of Texas' major markets. Undisclosed sources told The Wall Street Journal that KKR has assembled a war chest of $5 billion to $6 billion and will use part of it to gain a major stake in the financial industry. Besides Wells Fargo, several other large banks are thought to be eyeing MCorp, including Citicorp. of New York, the Journal said. 
Coffee and cocoa futures prices rose sharply Tuesday while prices for cotton, sugar and orange juice futures plunged. On other markets, energy futures advanced, precious metals, grain, soybean, livestock and meat futures were mixed and stock-index futures retreated. On New York's Coffee, Sugar &amp; Cocoa Exchange, coffee settled 2.5 cents to 6.56 cents higher with the contract for delivery in March at $1.659 a pound, the highest coffee futures price since Nov. 13, 1986. Prices rose despite weekend showers in the major coffee-growing region of Brazil, the world's largest producer. The rain came too late to reverse drought damage to the Brazilian crop, said analyst Kim Badenhop of Merrill Lynch Capital Markets Inc. in New York. He said strong demand was the driving force behind Tuesday's sharp gains. The winter months in the Northern Hemisphere mark the annual peak in world coffee consumption, and coffee-producing countries typically undership their International Coffee Organization quotas to exploit the surge in demand. ``It happens every year at this time,'' Badenhop said. ``Then in May, June, you'll see exports start to accelerate as they try to meet their quotas.'' World sugar futures prices plunged the permitted daily limit of .50 cent a pound with the limitless contracts for March and May deliveries dropping .78 cent and .76 cent, respectively. March sugar settled at 10.37 cents a pound. The sell-off was mostly technically inspired, with no fresh supply-demand news in the market, analysts said. But Judith Ganes, of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. in New York, said lower prices could bring some of the physical buying that many players have been expecting. ``Everyone's waiting for the Soviet Union and China to buy to bridge their domestic shortfalls,'' she said. ``After this drop in price, it might become attractive to them to enter the market.'' Cocoa rose $29 to $39 with March at $1,539 a metric ton on confirmation that the Ivory Coast, the world's largest producer, had sold 400,000 metric tons of cocoa to a French trade house, apparently putting into motion a complicated plan for withholding Ivorian cocoa from world markets. Cotton fell 1.15 cents to 1.82 cents on the New York Cotton Exchange with March settling at 56.67 cents a pound. The sell-off was sparked by weakening chart signals and rumors that U.S. cotton producers meeting in Nashville, Tenn., planned to ask the Agriculture Department to take action to reduce the price of U.S. cotton on the world market, said Ernest Simon of Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. Futures prices for frozen orange-juice concentrate tumbled 3.45 cents to 4.20 cents on the Cotton Exchange with January settling at $1.555 a pound. Mrs. Ganes of Shearson Lehman attributed the decline to the extremely mild weather in the Florida orange country during this, the critical freeze period. She said other fundamental factors governing orange-juice prices were very bearish and demand was so slow that processors were widely expected to drop their prices. Energy futures rose on the New York Mercantile Exchange, boosted by heavy buying of heating-oil futures ahead of an expected cold spell in the Northeast, said Peter Beutel, an analyst with Elders Futures Inc. in New York. West Texas Intermediate crude oil settled 7 cents to 33 cents higher with February at $17.36 a barrel; heating oil was .39 cent to .94 cent higher with February at 53.23 cents a gallon; unleaded gasoline was .14 cent to .27 cent higher with February at 47.27 cents a gallon. On New York's Commodity Exchange, gold settled $1.10 to $2.30 higher with February at $413.40 a troy ounce; silver was 1.3 cents to 1.5 cents lower with March at $6.115 a troy ounce. Grain and soybean futures finished mixed on the Chicago Board of Trade in a session that started on a high note, then faded on late profit-taking. Wheat settled } cent lower to 1{ cents higher with March at $4.39\ a bushel; corn was 3} cents lower to \ cent higher with March at $2.80} a bushel; oats were 1\ cents to 2\ cents higher with March at $2.45 a bushel; soybeans were 2 cents to 10 cents lower with January at $8.01} a bushel. On the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, live cattle settled unchanged to .45 cent higher with February at 74.17 cents a pound; feeder cattle were .10 cent to .43 cent higher with January at 84.32 cents a pound; live hogs were .25 cent to .50 cent lower with February at 46.15 cents a pound; frozen pork bellies were .13 cent to .63 cent lower with February at 42.42 cents a pound. Stock-index futures fell sharply on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. The contract for March delivery of the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index settled 2.75 points lower at 277.65. Each point is worth $500. 
The federal milk price support will continue at $10.60 per 100 pounds through March 31, Agriculture Secretary Richard E. Lyng announced Tuesday. The Agriculture Department buys surplus butter, cheese and non-fat dry milk at prices high enough to keep milk prices paid to farmers by dealers from dropping significantly below the support level. Under drought aid legislation passed last year, the department would have been required to boost milk supports 50 cents per hundredweight as of Jan. 1 if Lyng had estimated dairy purchases in calendar 1989 would be less than 2.5 billion pounds of milk equivalent. But Lyng said the department estimated net purchases by the Commodity Credit Corp. will be 6.5 billion pounds, thus overruling any increase in supports. In a separate announcement, the CCC said its price support crop loans to farmers will carry an 8~ percent rate for loans made in January, up from the December rate of 8\ percent. Officials said the increase reflects the rate charged CCC by the U.S. Treasury. 
The Department of Transportation agreed Tuesday to award the lucrative Seattle-Tokyo air route to Continental Airlines and will allow the Houston-based carrier to start service as early as March. The department earlier had awarded the route to United Airlines. But two weeks ago, the .S. Court of Appeals in Washington, D.C., ordered the department to give the route to Continental and the department said Tuesday it would not appeal that decision. ``We are doing what they ordered,'' said Hal Paris, a department spokesman. ``We feel the court has spoken and we will have to live with that decision.'' The route, which generates more than $100 million in revenue annually, has been the focus of an intense two-year battle between three of the nation's largest airlines _ Continental, United and American. At various times over the past two years, administrative law judges and top department officials have awarded the route to all three airlines. Most recently, the department had awarded the route to United. But Continental immediately asked the appeals court to overturn that decision, which the court agreed to do. Rob Doughty, a United spokesman in Chicago, said his airline would have ``no comment'' on the department's decision Tuesday to give the route to Continntal. Doughty had said earlier that United was considering appealing the appeals court decision granting the route to Continental. U.S. Sen. Brock Adams, D-Wash., who urged United be given the route, expressed his disappointment in a statement released by his Washington, D.C., office. ``This was a tough fight from the beginning and we did everything we could to see United succeed,'' said Adams, who was President Carter's secretary of transportation. ``While I think the decision was wrong, I will do what I can to help keep the commercial airline industry stable inthe Northwest and to help those working men and women affected by this decision,'' he said. United has been flying the non-stop Seattle-to-Tokyo run since 1983. But when United bought Pan American World Airway's Pacific Division in 1986 the Transportation Department said it wanted to take another look at whether United would be allowed to continue flying the route. Both Northwest Airlines and Japan Air Lines also fly non-stop between Seattle and Tokyo. Continental has previously said that it would offer one-way fares between Seattle and Tokyo as low as $299. American had said if it received the route it would construct a new $100 million to $150 million hub at Seattle-Tacoma International Airport. United put a $20 million expansion of its facilities at Sea-Tac on hold pending a decision in the case, and warned it might drop its Seattle-Hong Kong run if it wasn't allowed to continue to fly the Seattle-Tokyo route. United had also warned it would be forced to lay off some of its workers at Sea-Tac if it didn't receive the Seattle-Tokyo route. United had strong support from the Washington state congressional delegation and local community leaders. 
Coniston Partners said Tuesday it was easing the conditions on its $1.4 billion takeover offer for TW Services Inc., the New York-based food service company. Coniston said it would no longer insist on getting approval from TW Services' board of directors before proceeding with its offer, as long as TW Services dropped its ``poison pill'' anti-takeover defense, either voluntarily or by court order. TW Services owns 1,200 Denny's restaurants and 400 Hardee's restaurants, among other properties. Coniston is a New York-based investment firm. Coniston had wanted TW Services' board to endorse the takeover offer to shareholders because doing the deal on hostile terms would be more expensive. Coniston is offering $29 a share in cash for the 81 percent of TW Services it does not already own. TW Services officials could not be reached at their offices for comment on the Coniston statement after the close of business hours Tuesday. 
Budget Rent a Car Corp. says it has settled a dispute with the Federal Trade Commission over compliance with automobile recalls. The FTC charged Dec. 28 that Budget had rented cars subject to recall notices without having them inspected or repaired. Budget said Friday that it had reached a consent agreement with the FTC, basically agreeing to continue the recall practices it has followed since 1984. The company said there was no merit to the FTC charges. Budget said the charges stemmed from the company's inability to provide the government with sufficient proof that some cars had been inspected and the repairs made. The FTC action arose from an industry-wide investigation in 1981 in which car-rental companies were required to document their compliance with recall notices. 
Anita L. Peyton, publisher and general manager of the Carmi Times newspaper in Southern Illinois, has died of an apparent heart attack. She was 52. Mrs. Peyton had not been feeling well over the weekend, and had complained of being tired, said White County Coroner Carl McVey. She died Monday about 7:10 a.m. at Carmi Township Hospital, he said. ``It was quite a shock and totally unexpected,'' said Barry Cleveland, managing editor of the Carmi Times, a daily newspaper. ``She was always so very active.'' Mrs. Peyton helped start the Christmas-time collection and distribution of toys, clothing, food and money through the newspaper to the needy of White County. ``Her office looked like a jungle around Christmas because that was where the collection was stored,'' Cleveland said. Mrs. Peyton formerly worked at the Harrisburg Daily Register. She is survived by her husband, the Rev. Harrison L. Peyton; a daughter, Jane, and two sons, Buddy and William. Funeral arrangements are pending. 
Massachusetts drivers paid the highest auto insurance premiums in the nation in 1987, an average of $655, according to a report Tuesday by the A.M. Best Co. The national average was $487, the Oldwick, N.J., company said in its annual survey of auto insurance prices. Iowa had the lowest rates, an average of $256 per year. Massachusetts rates have outstripped New Jersey, which topped the list in 1986, the company found. New Jersey drivers paid an average of $635 to insure their cars in 1987, up from $604 in 1986. Massachusetts rates jumped an average of $100 in 1987, an 18 percent increase over 1986, the report found. The report did not take into account the recently enacted Massachusetts auto insurance reform law, which is estimated to save consumers up to $400 million. Insurance Comissioner Roger Singer has said the law, which took effect Jan. 1, 1989, will likely reduce Massachusetts insurance rates to the rank of fourth highest in the nation. After Massachusetts and New Jersey, the most expensive states in which to insure a car were California ($623), Arizona ($602), Nevada ($600), Maryland ($597) and Alaska ($588), the Best report found. New York ranked eighth at $583. The cheapest states after Iowa were South Dakota ($295), Alabama ($307), North Dakota ($328) and Tennessee ($328). Nationwide, auto insurance premiums jumped an average of 10 percent. Nonetheless, the U.S. property and casualty insurance industry suffered a $4.3 billion underwriting loss which was not compensated by $4 billion in investment earnings, Best said. In 1986, the industry also had a net operating loss of $200 million. Best arrives at its rankings by combining insurance data with the number of registered passenger cars. The company warned its results could be skewed by several factors, including differences in insurance coverages that are mandated by states. 
James F. Will, president and chief operating officer of Cyclops Industries Inc., has been elected chief executive officer effective Jan. 1., company officials said Tuesday. Will succeeds W. H. Knoell, who will remain chairman of the company until his retirement later this year. Will, 50, has been president and chief operating officer since 1986. He joined Cyclops Corp., the predecessor company of Cyclops Industries, as executive vice president of steel operations and became a member of the board of directors in 1982. He previously spent eight years as an executive with Kaiser Steel Corp. The Pittsburgh-based Cyclops Industries produces flat-rolled carbon and stainless steel tubular products. 
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari said his administration's No. 1 priority is to resume economic growth and Mexico's creditors ``should now do their part'' to help the nation reduce payments on its $106 billion foreign debt. ``We are serious and will continue to be serious'' about making payments on the debt, Salinas said in a New Year's speech to armed forces chiefs delivered Monday. ``We prefer firm negotiation to confrontation. But let me emphasize that for me, the interests of Mexico are more important than the interests of the creditors,'' Salinas said. He said Mexico has made ``an enormous sacrifice to correct our deficiencies, and now it's up to them (creditors) to do their part.'' Since he took power on Dec. 1, Salinas has maintained that ``the priority is no longer to keep paying, but to start growing again.'' Mexico last year paid $9 million in interest and $5 million in principle to service its debt; it faces total payments this year of about $16 billion. Salinas maintains that Mexico cannot continue to make such high payments if it wants to grow, because it needs the money to invest. Venezuelan President-elect Carlos Andres Perez, who will be inaugurated Feb. 2, is due to arrive Tuesday for a one-day visit. His meeting with Salinas comes in the wake of Venezuelan president Jaime Lusinchi's decision to suspend debt principal payments. Salinas said 1989 will be a year of economic transition, ``between a period of unstable inflation and one of low inflation, transition between stagnation and sustained recovery, transition towards a better standard of living for all Mexicans.'' ``The rhythm of transition will depend on the conditions of debt renegotiation. We have to take excessive debt service charges off the backs of Mexicans,'' Salinas said. 
Tyson Foods Inc. is considering an increase in its $54-a-share offer for Holly Farms Corp., a rival poultry processor headquartered in Memphis, a Tyson spokesman said Tuesday. Holly Farms, in an effort to fend off the Tyson offer, is trying to be absorbed by ConAgra Inc., a processor of food and agricultural products headquartered in Omaha, Neb. But a ConAgra spokesman declined to say Tuesday if that company still is pressing for the merger, which has been temporarily blocked by a Delaware court. ``We are reviewing our options and we really don't have anything more to say right now,'' Walt Casey, ConAgra's vice president for corporate communications, said from his office in Omaha. Jim Blair, general counsel for Tyson, said company officers were planning to gather at their headquarters in Springdale, Ark., this week to discuss the Holly Farms project. ``We're going to try to find a way to make the Holly Farms board and Holly shareholders a fair and generous offer that they can't in good conscience turn down,'' Blair said. Asked if that meant an increase in the $54 bid, Blair said, ``I think it's a possibility.'' Tyson, the nation's largest poultry processor, has been trying since Oct. 11 to take over Holly Farms, but Holly's board of directors has resisted those attempts. Tyson's latest offer is worth about $970 million. Holly Farms, a diversified food company heavily involved in poultry processing, announced plans in November to head off Tyson's takeover by merging with ConAgra in a stock swap valued at $1 billion. Tyson went to court in Delaware, where Tyson and Holly Farms are incorporated, and a chancellor issued a ruling Friday temporarily blocking the Holly Farms-ConAgra deal. Tyson argued that Holly Farms owed it to its stockholders to consider all buyout offers. Holly Farms issued a statement Monday saying the ruling would be appealed and that shareholders of Holly Farms and ConAgra would be asked at separate meetings next month to vote on the proposed merger. ``The court's decision does not in any way affect our resolve to complete the transaction with ConAgra,'' Holly Farms president R. Lee Taylor II said in the statement. Blair said he was surprised that Holly Farms was so eager to appeal the chancellor's ruling. ``A Holly Farms manager, in view of what the court has said, ought to say, `Since we're liberated from our obligation to ConAgra we would like to negotiate with both parties and get the best price we can for our shareholders.' I don't understand why they're not doing that,'' Blair said. Holly Farms, which has more than 15,000 employees in 20 states, had net income of $36.2 million in 1987 on sales of $1.6 billion. ConAgra had $9.5 billion in sales last year, making it the fourth-largest food company in the nation, according to Fortune magazine. Tyson, which processes some 14 million pounds of chicken a week, had total sales last year of just under $2 billion, Blair said. Tyson's attempt to buy Holly Farms began with a friendly offer worth about $900 million in cash or stock. When the Holly Farms board rejected that advance, Tyson launched its hostile offer, presenting its bid directly to Holly Farms stockholders. On the New York Stock Exchange Tuesday, Holly Farms closed at $56.75, up from $55.62 on Friday. The financial markets were closed Monday because of the New Year's holiday. 
Wall Street opened for business in 1989 with a markdown on Tuesday as a jump in interest rates and a weaker dollar combined to send stock prices lower. The Dow Jones average of 30 industrials fell 23.93 points to 2,144.64, a drop of just over 1 percent. Broader measures of the market posted smaller declines. Good news was indirectly responsible for the stock market's drop. The National Association of Purchasing Management reported that the economy grew in December at its briskest rate in five months. The report raised fears that inflation would heat up, and bond prices fell, triggering a sympathetic reaction in the stock market. ``The real problem today was the drop in the bond market and the drop in the dollar. This raised concern about the possibility that the Fed (Federal Reserve) would have to tighten further to protect the dollar from further declines,'' said Michael Metz, a market analyst for Oppenheimer &amp; Co. Computerized program selling added to the pressure on blue-chip stocks. Stocks that were not involved in the programs fared better, although most of them also fell. Robert Murphy, a senior market specialist for Merrill Lynch &amp; Co., said the first day of trading does not necessarily set a trend for the month or the year. ``This might be a sucker punch day,'' he said. Declining issues outnumbered advancing ones by about 3-to-2 in nationwide trading of New York Stock Exchange-listed stocks, with 619 up, 942 down and 424 unchanged. Volume on the floor of the Big Board remained modest at 128.50 million shares, up from 127.21 million on Friday. The market was closed on Monday for the New Year's holiday. Nationwide, consolidated volume in NYSE-listed issues, including trades in those stocks on regional exchanges and in the over-the-counter market, totaled 155.42 million shares. Among blue-chip issues, General Motors declined 1\ to 82\, Du Pont sank 1~ to 86], McDonald's lost 1] to 46}, American Telephone &amp; Telegraph fell [ to 28|, and International Business Machines was unchanged at 121~. Among the volume leaders, RJR Nabisco fell 1 to 90[ and Exxon was off } at 43\. Public Service of New Hampshire jumped almost 24 percent, climbing 1[ to 5~. A Nuclear Regulatory Commission panel conditionally approved the New Hampshire portion of the emergency plan for the Seabrook nuclear power plant, in which the company holds a major stake. Holly Farms rose 1[ to 56}. The poultry producer said it would fight a court ruling won by hostile suitor Tyson Foods that blocks Holly Farms from a friendly merger with ConAgra Corp. General Cinema was a big loser, falling 1{ to 24. Pepsico's $1.5 billion purchase of General Cinema's soft-drink bottling business has fallen through, delayed beyond a 1988 deadline for completion by a government request for antitrust information about the proposed deal, the companies said. Commodore International, the personal computer maker, fell } to 13\. The company said the Internal Revenue Service said it owed $74 million in back taxes. As measured by Wilshire Associates' index of more than 5,000 actively traded stocks, the overall market declined $19.83 billion, or 0.72 percent, in value. The NYSE's composite index of all its listed common stocks fell 1.28 to 154.98. Standard &amp; Poor's industrial index fell 2.60 to 318.66, and S&amp;P's 500-stock composite index fell 2.41 to 275.31. The NASDAQ composite index for the over-the-counter market fell 2.82 to 378.56. At the American Stock Exchange, the market value index closed at 305.24, a decline of 0.77. 
The world's largest bank, Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank Ltd., said Tuesday it is selling its Chicago retail operations to First American Bank Corp., a suburban bank holding company, so it can focus entirely on business banking. Terms of the transaction were not disclosed. The deal includes assets of $35 million, including about 6,000 checking, savings and other accounts, and a retail loan portfolio of less than $5 million, the companies said in a joint statement. Dai-Ichi said the Chicago office was its only U.S. branch with retail operations. But Yoshiro Aoki, joint general manager of the Chicago branch, said a Dai-Ichi subsidiary in Los Angeles, the Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank of California, also offers retail banking. Dai-Ichi also operates branches in Los Angeles, New York and Atlanta and has offices, but not full branches, in Houston and San Francisco. Tokyo-based Dai-Ichi, with more than $375 billion in assets worldwide, said it plans to relocate and expand its downtown Chicago branch to accomodate the rapid growth of its business banking activities. First American, based in Elk Grove Village, has $500 million in assets and 18 banking locations in the Chicago area. The firm said it would retain Dai-Ichi's Chicago retail staff. The deal marked a ``milestone'' for First American by giving the company its first downtown location, said Chairman Thomas E. Wells IV. ``It fulfills a critical goal in our strategy of geographical expansion,'' Wells said. But for Dai-Ichi, with assets of about $3 billion at its Chicago branch alone, ``this is insignificant, with a capital `I,''' said Frederick Wightman, a banking analyst with Duff &amp; Phelps Inc. in Chicago. Wightman said Japanese banks with U.S. branches generally are more interested in large-scale commercial business than in consumer checking, savings and loans. ``Retail banking is tied closely to deposit-gathering and with the high savings rate in Japan, attracting retail deposits (overseas) is not a big concern for Japanese banks,'' Wightman said. ``The deposits are available in more than adequate quantities back in Japan.'' Dai-Ichi's Chicago branch, established by the company in 1972 as the First Pacific Bank of Chicago and converted to branch status late in 1981, counts among its customers such well-known Midwestern corporations as Brunswick Corp.; Ford Motor Co.; Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber Co.; McDonald's Corp.; and Sears, Roebuck and Co. Fumiyasu Konno, general manager of the Chicago branch, said specialization was synonomous with survival in the banking business. ``Banks must focus resources and expertise in the markets that offer them the greatest opportunities,'' he said in a statement. The sale is expected to be completed in the spring after regulatory approval. 
Anchor Glass Container Corp. announced Tuesday it is raising prices on some glassware items to offset rising costs. Prices for consumer glassware, such as mason jars and drinking tumblers, will increase an average of 5 percent, and prices for returnable beverage bottles will increase 6 percent, said James H. Smith, vice president and chief financial officer. ``The changes, which take effect immediately, apply to only a few percent'' of sales, Smith said. The company raised the prices to cover increased costs for raw materials and packing materials, Smith said. Anchor Glass said it is the second largest domestic manufacturer of glass containers for the brewing, food, soft drink, distilled spirits and wine industries. The company lost $2.4 million in its third quarter for 1988, blaming price discounting in the glass container industry. It said it expects to post a loss for both the fourth quarter and all of 1988. The company earned $20.0 million in 1987 on sales of $766 million. 
The Sun-Times Co., publisher of the Chicago Sun-Times, said Tuesday it would purchase the 38 Pioneer Newspapers Group weeklies from the Field Corp. Pioneer's newspapers, which include the Evanston Review and Oak Leaves of Oak Park, cover more than 79 communities. They have a combined weekly paid circulation in excess of 170,000. ``We are building for the future,'' said acting publisher Charles T. Price, ``and the acquisition of Pioneer Newspapers is one more sign of this strong commitment.'' The Sun-Times also recently bought the Star Publications, 18 twice-weekly suburban newspapers covering 49 communities southwest of Chicago. Lee Mitchell, Field president and chief executive officer, said the transaction will be completed in the next few weeks, but he declined to disclose the terms of the purchase agreement. ``We are accepting an unsolicited offer from the Sun-Times because it provides an attractive return on the investment we made in Pioneer in 1984,'' Mitchell said. Pioneer Press was purchased by an affiliate of The Field Corp. from Time Inc. in 1984. The Field Corp. is a Chicago-based holding company that manages several operating companies, including Field Publications, publisher of the children's newspaper ``Weekly Reader.'' 
Curbing future use of chemical weapons, not judging events in the past, is the purpose of a meeting of more than 140 countries beginning this weekend, Foreign Minister Roland Dumas said Wednesday. But the United States is widely expected to make an issue of its allegations that Libya has built a large chemical weapons plant. The conference, opening Saturday, follows the downing of two Libyan jet fighters by U.S. Navy planes on Wednesday. The conference also may become a forum for disputes between Iran and Iraq, following Iraq's use of chemical weapons in the eight-year Persian Gulf war. Iraq said it used chemical weapons after Iran did, but Iran has denied using them. Speaking at a news conference, Dumas said France hopes the five-day conference ``will not deviate from its agenda'' after the incident. He also said the meeting should avoid reviewing past chemical weapons deployment. ``The Paris conference must not judge past acts,'' Dumas said. The aim of the conference is to reaffirm the 1925 Geneva Protocol banning the use of chemical weapons and give impetus to negotiations in Geneva on a universal ban on use and production of chemical arms. Javier Perez de Cuellar, the U.N. secretary-general, will attend the conference, U.N. officials said. William Burns, the U.S. arms control director, told reporters in Washington on Wednesday that the American delegation will focus on trying to strengthen the secretary-general's authority to investigate allegations of chemical weapons use and authorize the U.N. General Assembly or Security Council to impose sanctions. But Burns said this could be difficult since all actions at the conference will be taken by consensus. This means a single participant, such as Libya, could hold off an overwhelming majority. The U.S. government accuses Libya of having built a chemical weapons plant in the desert town of Rabta, 35 miles south of its capital, Tripoli. President Reagan last month said a military strike on the plant was under consideration. Libya says the plant in question produces pharmaceuticals. West German radio quoted the Foreign Ministry as saying the West German ambassador in Tripoli met Wednesday with Libyan leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi to discuss ways for an international commission to inspect the Rabta plant. U.S. officials have said they suspect that a West German company helped build the chemical plant. Hans-Dietrich Genscher, West Germany's foreign minister, told reporters in Bonn before the attack that his government was investigating the firm Imhausen-Chemie, but that it had no independent verification of the U.S. claims that it supplied Libya with materials for the plant. Britain's Foreign Office said Wednesday night it had independent information confirming the plant was built to produce chemical weapons. It was Britain's first comment on the U.S. allegations. On Wednesday, two American F-14s shot down two Libyan jet fighters. U.S. government officials said the Navy jets were conducting routine operations and had been threatened. U.S. Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci denied the action was related to the earlier accusation concerning the chemical weapons plant. Dumas said it was too soon for all the facts on the air skirmish to be known and that France awaited the ``Libyan version'' of the events. Dumas said France did not have enough information to decide whether the Libyan plant was capable of producing chemical weapons. The conference was formally proposed by President Reagan during his September address to the U.N. General Assembly. 
A mine overhead collapsed Wednesday, trapping and killing three coal miners, according to searchers who recovered their bodies, state officials said. The miners were about 2,400 feet inside the Cumberland Valley Contractors Inc. No. 2 mine, removing coal pillars when the roof fell about 3:20 p.m., said Willard Stanley, commissioner of the state Department of Mines and Minerals. Stanley identified the first miner discovered as Steve Bradburn, 36, whose body was removed from the mine late Wednesday. Joe Burleson, an administrative assistant for Cumberland Valley, said the two other miners, Joe Ditty, 32, and Tony Osborne, 31, were discovered late Wednesday night. Ditty, from Harlan, was a brother to the mine's co-owner, Stanley Ditty, officials said. No hometowns were available for Bradburn and Osborne. The federal Mine Safety and Health Administration said 12 people work on one shift, mining a 48-inch seam at the No. 2 mine, which had no fatalities or serious injuries in 1988. State and federal officials said the mine had no violations involving roof regulations in 1988. Kentucky reported only one roof-fall death last year, down from 15 in 1987. 
Cuban President Fidel Castro on Wednesday said the first of 3,000 Cuban troops in Angola will return home Tuesday, the official Prensa Latina news agency reported. Castro also warned that a plan to cut the number of U.N. peacekeeping troops in neighboring Namibia would permit South Africa to install a puppet government in that country, also known as South-West Africa. ``We will fulfill our obligations before the first of April,'' Castro said in a dispatch monitored in Mexico City. He was referring to the deadline for the pullout of the first 3,000 Cuban troops from Angola under a U.S.-brokered peace accord. Angola, Cuba and South Africa signed a treaty Dec. 22 calling for the withdrawal of the 50,000-strong Cuban force from Angola within 30 months, half of them by Nov. 1. Castro said a proposal to reduce the size of a U.N. peacekeeping force in Namibia from 7,500 to 3,000 troops would enable South Africa to maintain a powerbroker's role in Namibia and complicate the Cuban pullout from Angola. ``Difficulties have arisen'' in enacting the accord ``for the independence of Namibia, for which SWAPO has fought many years, spilling the blood of many of its combatants,'' Castro said, referring to the acronym for the South-West African Peoples Organization nationalist movement. ``Taking into account the growth of the South African forces .. . in Namibia, the reduced number of (U.N.) troops could not guarantee these goals and would benefit South African plans to install a titular government in the country,'' Castro declared. He said Cuba had made its concerns known to the U.N. Security Council. Castro's complaints echoed those made by Sam Nujoma, leader of SWAPO, earlier Wednesday in Havana, the Cuban capital. Castro suggested that other African nations, including Nigeria, Ethiopia and Tanzania, contribute troops to the U.N. force, Prensa Latina said. Cuba sent troops to Angola in 1975 to help the Marxist government fight invading South African troops and U.S.-backed rebels of the right-wing National Union of the Total Independence of Angola, called UNITA. 
Florence Ryder, chairman of the board of the Times Journal Co. which publishes the Army Times and other suburban Journal newspapers, died of a heart attack Wednesday at her home here. She was 88. Mrs. Ryder was the widow of Melvin Ryder, who in 1940 founded the Army Times, and she had been in the management of the company from its inception. She had been chairman of the board since he died in 1979. The company, which became the Times Journal Co. in 1984, now includes five suburban daily newspapers in the Washington area: the Montgomery, Prince George's, Fairfax, Arlington and Alexandria Journals, with a combined circulation of 150,000. It also includes The Prince William Journal, a weekly with a circulation of 26,000, and six semi-weekly newspapers in the suburban San Diego area. It is the largest publisher of military newspapers in the country with the weeklies, Army Times, Navy Times, Air Force Times, Federal Times and Defense News, and the monthly magazine, Military Market. Mrs. Ryder, a native of Bedford, Ohio, moved to the Washington area in the 1930s after her first husband, William Donnelly, died in the late 1920s. Survivors include three children of her first marriage, William Donnelly, Richard Donnelly and Sister Ann Donnelly, all of Washington; three daughters of her second marriage, Susan Skaggs of West Chester, Pa., Mary Jane Belber and Milly Ryder, both of Washsington; 16 grandchildren and nine great grandchidren. 
U.S. Navy jet fighters shot down two Libyan MiG-23 jets Wednesday after the Americans were approached at high speed in what Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci called ``a hostile manner'' in international airspace over the Mediterranean Sea. Carlucci said the two American F-14 Tomcat jets acted solely in self-defense. Based on preliminary reports, the Soviet-built Libyan jets activated their weapon-targeting radar before the U.S. jets opened fire with their air-to-air missiles, he said. Carlucci denied that the jets, assigned to the aircraft carrier USS John F. Kennedy, were airborne to participate in a military strike on a disputed chemical weapons production plant inside Libya. President Reagan now oppposes a U.S. military strike against the plant because it would cause an international furor that might harm other U.S. interests, the Washington Post reported in Thursday's editions. Carlucci said the carrier was only crossing the Mediterranean toward a port call and conducting routine operations when the incident occurred at midday local time, about 5 a.m. EST. The U.S. planes, each carrying two crewmen, returned without incident to their carrier and were then flown to Naples, Italy, for debriefing, Carlucci said. The fate of the two Libyan pilots remained unclear, although he said ``two parachutes were sighted'' and a rescue helicopter was later seen in the area. It was the first military confrontation between the United States and Libya since a U.S. bombing raid over Tripoli in 1986. That raid came after the Reagan administration said it had conclusive evidence that Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi was behind a terrorist bombing attack in West Germany. Reagan, on vacation in Los Angeles, was awakened about an hour after the downing and told of the incident by Lt. Gen. Colin L. Powell, his national security adviser, in a phone call, said White House spokesman Roman Popadiuk. The spokesman said he had no information on Reagan's reaction, except to say that the president ``considers the incident closed.'' In Washington at a Pentagon briefing, Carlucci echoed that: ``We now consider this matter closed.'' Libya's Foreign Ministry called it a ``premeditated attack'' by U.S. forces and said it would seek an emergency meeting of the U.N. Security Council. President-elect Bush was told of the incident by phone at 6 a.m. Wednesday by the White House situation room, according to spokeswoman Sheila Tate. ``He's being kept informed'' throughout the day, she added. Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Sam Nunn, D-Ga., said the U.S. jets were acting defensively and the Libyan planes ``had maneuvered themselves into a position of attack _ and they did it on two occasions.'' ``That violates the rules of engagement that we have common understanding on in the international environment,'' Nunn said. ``You cannot, in this day and time and modern technology, wait until another plane has fired in order to defend yourself. It's too late then.'' Senate Republican Leader Bob Dole of Kansas said the downing appeared to be ``self-defense _ pure and simple.'' Gadhafi ``never learns,'' Dole said. ``Maybe this time he will finally get it straight: Whenever he threatens American forces, we will defend ourselves.'' Carlucci said the Libyan jets were ``shot down in self-defense by American F-14s with air-to-air missiles.'' The defense secretary said the MiGs ``were detected shortly after they left Al Bumbah'' airfield and were tracked. The U.S. pilots, he added, ``maneuvered to avoid the closing aircraft. They changed speed, altitude and direction. ``The Libyan aircraft continued to close in a hostile manner. At about 14 miles, the U.S. section leader decided his aircraft was in jeopardy and they could wait no longer. One MiG-23 was shot down with a Sparrow missile. The second MiG was shot down by a Sidewinder missile at six miles.'' The incident occurred well off the Libyan coast in international airspace, Carlucci said. The aircraft carrier was about 127 miles north of Tobruk, Libya, while the two F-14s were about 70 miles north of the coast. A Navy E-2C Hawkeye radar surveillance plane was airborne with the two Tomcat fighters and monitored the action, said one Pentagon official who asked not to be identified. ``It was all routine, until these guys (the Libyans) took off and headed straight for the F-14s,'' the source added. ``Based on our current information ... the (U.S.) pilots descended in altitude from approximately 15,000 feet to 4,000 feet and they took some five different evasive actions,'' Carlucci said. ``Each time, the Libyan aircraft sought to put their nose on our aircraft. They also accelerated. So the hostile intent seems to be fairly clear,'' he said. Carlucci said there was ``some preliminary information that radars were turned on.'' In Rome, Libya's ambassador to Italy, Abdel Rahman Shalgam, called Wednesday's incident ``a unilateral act'' and a dangerous action. He declined to say how Libya would respond. The Libyan Foreign Ministry said that as ``Libyan reconnaissance aircraft were carrying out a patrol over international waters, U.S. aircraft carried out a premeditated attack on them and shot them down.'' Libya's official JANA news agency said the Foreign Ministry ordered its United Nations representative to ``present an urgent complaint to the Security Council concerning the aggression perpetrated by the U.S.A. against two Libyan reconnaissance planes ... and to demand the holding of an urgent Security Council meeting on this subject.'' Last month, in a television interview, Reagan said administration officials had debated a military attack on a newly constructed plant that Libya is preparing to produce chemical weapons, but added: ``That is a decision that has not been made yet.'' Libya claims the plant will make pharmaceuticals, and Gadhafi has charged the United States is using the allegations of chemical weapon production as a pretext to attack his country. Carlucci insisted Wednesday the Kennedy and its air wing had no designs on the chemical weapons plant. ``This has nothing whatsoever to do with all the speculation, and if I may say, excessive speculation, that has existed'' on the chemical plant, Carlucci said. ``If you were going to make an attack on the chemical plant, you would not position your carrier some 600 miles away. I think that's self evident.'' 
Two masked men claiming to be Red Brigades terrorists shot and wounded the assistant director of a prison after trying to seize him, authorities said. Egidio de Luca was returning to his home near Tivoli, about 30 miles northeast of Rome, on Tuesday night the two men blocked his path, police said. The assailants, armed with pistols, identified themselves as members of the ``New Red Brigades of the Fighting Communist Party'' and tried to grab de Luca, they said. When he reached for his gun, the men shot him in the thigh, police said. A bodyguard following de Luca then started shooting at the assailants, who fled to a nearby car and escaped. De Luca was hospitalized in Tivoli in serious condition, police said. The Red Brigades, a collection of far-left terrorist groups, used killing, kidnapping and ``knee-capping'' _ shooting someone in the knee _ to try to destroy confidence in the Italian state during the 1970s and early 1980s. The group has greatly diminished in size in recent years. The Fighting Communist Party is a military wing of the Red Brigades and, according to the Italian news agency AGI, the New Red Brigades is a faction with about 100 members, most of them very young. De Luca is assistant director of Rome's Rebibbia prison, which holds 1,300 people and includes a maximum-security section that holds terrorists, among others. De Luca is responsible for a section with people accused of common crimes, AGI said. Employees of the prison in the past have been victims of Red Brigades attacks. De Luca's home was firebombed in 1980, when he was employed at the prisons office of the Justice Ministry, the Italian news agency ANSA said. No one claimed responsibility for the attack. The last Red Brigades killing was in April, when Sen. Roberto Ruffilli was shot near his home in Forli in northern Italy. 
Ear-splitting military training flights over this densely populated country became a major issue in West Germany in 1988 because of a series of crashes, and opponents have vowed to step up their campaign this year. ``This self-imposed threat from the skies must end. Our populated areas must above all be safe,'' Erwin Horn, a federal lawmaker with the opposition Social Democrats, said Tuesday. NATO pilots resumed tactical flights over West Germany on Tuesday following a three-week moratorium in memory of the victims of a Dec. 8 crash of a U.S. military jet on the northern city of Remscheid. Five West Germans and the U.S. pilot were killed. Critics insist on more than a moratorium and say they will step up their pressure for NATO forces in West Germany to abandon low-level training flights, in which planes fly at altitudes as low as 250 feet. ``We want military low-level flights to stop permanently,'' said Werner Mey, head of the nationwide protest group, ``Coordination of Opponents of Low-Level Flights.'' ``There will be a whole spectrum of (protest) actions this year,'' Mey said in a telephone interview from his home in Biebelnheim near Mainz. The screeching of NATO jets on low-flying training maneuvers is a frequent occurrence in West Germany, where air bases are scattered across the country. There are about 400,000 foreign NATO troops in West Germany, more than half of them Americans. A series of military air crashes in 1988 has ignited widespread opposition among the West German populace to NATO low-level training flights. Politicians from the Social Democratic Party are among the most vocal opponents of the flights, at times scolding the United States and other NATO partners with warplanes here over the issue. ``I appeal to the Allies to stop their low-level flights _ and to carry out these flights at home,'' said legislator Albrecht Mueller, a Social Democrat. He said West Germany's NATO partners should not expect ``German citizens to bear burdens that their own people are spared from.'' The debate over whether to stop NATO low-level training flights has been a divisive one. Polls indicate that nearly three-quarters of all West Germans want the flights to stop. In fact, observers note it can be politically dangerous to support low-level training flights. ``Whoever says `Let's reduce low-level flights' is certain of meeting with approval,'' the respected daily Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung said in an editorial on Tuesday. Government officials, under public pressure, say they want low-level flights reduced to a ``minimum.'' But they insist the exercises are necessary for the proper training of NATO pilots stationed in this country to offset possible threats from the East bloc. Defense Minister Rupert Scholz has been targeted for harsh criticism during the dispute. ``Perhaps a defense minister is needed with more experience and more talent in balancing out military needs with citizens who are tormented by ... military flights,'' the Munich newspaper Merkur said in a commentary. The dispute over low-level jet training exercises is the central issue of a larger debate _ often targeting the prominent U.S. military presence _ over whether West Germans are truly masters of their own land. The left-leaning Frankfurter Rundschau newspaper on Tuesday published a story about what it called ``round-the-clock noise terror'' from U.S. helicopter units based near Frankfurt. It said ``protests against the helicopter base at Bonames (near Frankfurt) have never been as loud as they are now.'' ``The U.S. Armed Forces have not appeared especially ready to cooperate'' in reducing the noise at the base, the newspaper wrote. The U.S. government insists its military forces do nothing to limit West German sovereignty or to go against the wishes of the West German government. But many leftists have charged that conservative West German officials wouldn't dare to thwart the will of U.S. military officials. Horn, in a list of demands on the defense minister, said Tuesday that ``German jurisprudence and German law should be put to use in order to work against the loss of sovereignty through non-use.'' The opposition party plans to begin a parliamentary initiative this month to examine whether West Germany's sovereignty rights are in jeopardy, and if so what can be done about it. 
The Federal Crime Office says 662 people died from drug abuse in West Germany last year, the highest number of drug-related fatalities in the country's history. Volker Limburg, head of the office's narcotics division, said Tuesday that the record death toll was in part attributable to the unusually high purity of some of the heroin being sold illegally in the country. He said most addicts are accustomed to a more diluted form of the drug, and that the 60 percent purity mix circulating has increased the risk of overdose. On the other hand, Limburg said, a sharp rise in impurities in some drugs also contributed to the unusually high death toll. Authorities have found gypsum, or plaster, being used to cut heroin by some dealers, he said. Suicide through intentional overdosing was a third cause behind the high death toll, which exceeded the 623 drug-related deaths in 1979, the previous record year, Limburg said. The average age of the victims was 28 and heroin was most frequently the drug involved. 
The Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith will honor Secretary of State George P. Shultz with its Klinghoffer Award for combating terrorism. Shultz will receive the award in June during the league's annual meeting of its national commission. The award is given by the league's Leon and Marilyn Klinghoffer Memorial Foundation, which was started after Leon Klinghoffer was shot to death by Palestinian terrorists who seized the Italian cruise ship Achille Lauro in 1985. In a statement dated Friday, their children, Ilsa and Lisa Klinghoffer, cited Shultz's ``courageous decision'' to deny Palestine Liberation Organization leader Yasser Arafat a visa to address the United Nations General Assembly in New York. The statement did not mention Shultz's subsequent announcement that established the first official American talks with the PLO. The Klinghoffer Award was given in 1987 to the British government for breaking diplomatic relations with Syria after an attempted bombing of an El Al jetliner from London in which Syria was implicated. No award was given in 1988. 
Heavy rains have sent rivers over their banks and let loose mudslides on coastal communities that have killed at least eight people and left 553 homeless, civil defense officials say. Authorities said Tuesday that many coastal towns were isolated because of blocked roads after several days of rain. The mudslides began late Friday and continued through Tuesday in the mountains north of Caracas along the Caribbean, said Freddy Paris, head of Venezuela's Civil Defense force. He said emergency workers at the mudslides recovered eight dead over the weekend. Poor neighborhoods of shacks built along the banks of creeks suffered the heaviest damage, with some homes swept away, Paris said. So far, authorities have counted 126 houses destroyed and 247 severely damaged, Paris said Tuesday. Most of the homeless were being housed in temporary shelters and in businesses in local towns. 
Freshman Rep. Ronald K. Machtley was entertaining a small group of relatives, lobbyists and other guests at his swearing-in party Tuesday when a man entered who received perhaps the most emotional greeting of all. ``I have a Xerox machine here,'' said the custodian, peering into Machtley's Longworth House Office Building suite. ``Grab him. Take it,'' the congressman roared. Machtley could hardly be blamed for his desperation. The office he inherited came with furniture but no typewriters, copying machines or other equipment _ hardly the best way to get a running start in the 101st Congress, but a common situation for newcomers. The Rhode Island Republican is one of just 33 freshmen in the 435-member House, but he comes to the job with more notoriety than most. He was the only one of six challengers to defeat an incumbent in November, and the only one to oust a committee chairman: Democrat Fernand J. St Germain, who headed the House banking panel. Machtley _ pronounced MAKE-ly _ received his party's nomination only after a favored rival failed to file his declaration of candidacy in time for the primary. His surprising 56 percent to 44 percent victory over the 14-term veteran St Germain came after the incumbent was battered with renewed attention to allegations that he received favors from lobbyists. Machtley had never before run for public office. ``I accept that I won't go down there and turn Congress upside-down legislatively,'' the 40-year-old lawyer said last week from his office in Newport, R.I. ``But I have the educational background so that I'll do a good job.'' Machtley, a Naval Academy graduate who went on to become an attorney, defeated St Germain after a campaign in which he took popular positions in the overwhelmingly Democratic district, such as favoring a woman's right to abortion and reduced spending on President Reagan's ``Star Wars'' missile defense program. On Tuesday, his victorious campaign bore fruit as he officially took over as the congressman from Rhode Island's 1st Congressional District. Actually, Machtley began savoring the perks of office even before he was sworn in. ``Look, there's Cooter,'' he told his family during their walk to the swearing-in ceremony in the Capitol when he spied a fellow newcomer, Rep. Ben Jones, a Georgia Democrat best known for his portrayal on television's ``The Dukes of Hazzard'' of the good ole boy Cooter. ``I've met him. He's a nice guy.'' Machtley and his wife Kati, who for now are staying with their two children at a local hotel, began their day working out in an exercise room at 8 a.m. He was in his office an hour later, joined by a few family members, including his wife, two children, parents and mother-in-law. The group crossed the street to the Capitol to watch a two-hour session of the House that culminated in members taking the oath of office. ``It's a real big deal,'' concluded his 12-year-old daughter, Erin. Then it was back to his Longworth office, where a small group of lobbyists, staff and other lawmakers dined on cold cuts, soda, beer and wine, and mingled with relatives who told of the days Machtley, while in the Naval Academy, earned spare change by diving for balls in golf course ponds, polishing them up and selling them. ``I was the one who had to clean them,'' said his younger sister, Susan Carl. Above the din of the reception, Machtley juggled interviews with Rhode Island reporters and posed for photographs with his family. It was all interrupted by a strange series of loud buzzes, well-known to the ears of Capitol Hill veterans. ``What is that?'' he asked his aides. It was the signal used to summon members to the House floor for a vote. 
In their bid to win public support, Cuban authorities not only extol the virtues of socialism but also frequently use ridicule to try to discredit the purported evils of capitalism. The other day, the Cuban Communist Party daily newspaper Granma cited some of the ``horror'' toys sold during the Christmas season in the United States as examples of the crude excesses of capitalism. The article mentioned dolls that spew green vomit when squeezed and toy monsters with removable organs soaked in fake blood. In addition, the commentary said, there are ``other objects so incredible and abominable that the most elemental good taste prevents their description in a newspaper. ``What can be expected from that country where private property and the quest for profits are sacred and untouchable?'' the commentary asked. Variations on the same theme accompany the rhetoric of President Fidel Castro in his defense of the Cuban system. Castro has been especially strident lately. He seems to sense that with the reformist trend in the Soviet Union and other Communist countries, few of those countries' leaders are speaking out for ideological purity. ``Socialism or death, Marxism-Leninism or death,'' the president said Sunday night on the 30th anniversary of the revolution that ousted rightist dictator Fulgencio Batista and swept Castro to power. As Cuban officials see it, to dilute the socialist ethic would open the way to such capitalist ills as drug abuse and the AIDS epidemic. Cuba's socialist model faces immense problems, ranging from chronic product shortages to shoddy goods, but Castro still likes to compare revolutionary Cuba with the U.S.-dominated pre-revolutionary era. He says 100,000 Cuban women were involved in prostitution during the 1950s and gambling casinos siphoned off the meager income of workers, often leaving their children unfed. The old system, he says, left 80 per cent of the Cuban people semiliterate. Now, he says, virtually every worker is highly literate and politically aware. The United States now has the literacy problem, he says. He adds that even a simple task like getting on the right bus can thwart some Americans because they can't read the route signs. Capitalist societies, says Castro, are marked by ``consumer anxiety'' and the quest for profit _ not by a ``zeal for resolving mankind's problems.'' Castro says he believes that under capitalism, people start to believe they are entitled to more than they really need. To make the point, he sometimes resorts to exaggeration: ``When somebody has enough to dress himself nicely, he wants to change clothes every day,'' he says. ``When he can change clothes every day, he wants to change in the morning, at noon and in the afternoon and before going to bed also. This is the system that governs capitalist societies.'' These types of ``crazy luxuries,'' Castro says, are common in rich countries that pillage poor ones. At home, Castro has eased up a bit on some practices associated with capitalism. Tipping, for example, is now tolerated. Officials also allow moonlighting by carpenters and other skilled workers. But two years ago, Castro acted decisively against what he regarded as more dangerous forms of capitalist penetration. He discovered, for example, that some Cubans were making huge sums off a 6-year-old experiment under which farmers sold a portion of their goods at market rates. Castro abolished the program. He said some enterprising Cubans were making 20 times more than a Cuban doctor who performs heart transplants. 
Golfers entering the ``Arctic Open'' might get a few extra yards of skid on their drives and they certainly won't have to worry about a water hazard: They'll be playing on top of one. The Jan. 28-29 open will be played on the frozen fairways of Wehrspann Lake at the Chalco Hills Recreation Area. A nine-hole golf course has been laid out on the lake. The Omaha Suburban Rotary Club hopes the tournament will raise $20,000 for scholarships for handicapped high school students, said club member Lyle Sapp. Anything more will be used to help the homeless, Meals on Wheels program, and the Henry Doorly Zoo, he said. The tournament will benefit wildlife, too. When the ice melts, discarded Christmas trees, which will set the fairway borders, will sink into the lake to provide habitat for fish and other aquatic species. 
Meet ERL and FRED, two new wild and crazy acronyms that are rolling off the tongues of state officials like winter fog off Puget Sound. ERL stands for ``essential requirement level,'' that is: the amount of money absolutely needed to pay for state government. FRED, who has far less status on the Capitol Campus than ERL, is short for ``fraud early detection'' of welfare chiselers, one of Gov. Booth Gardner's many programs that are supposed to save money eventually. ERL and FRED are two new creations of state government word-manglers, who are busy mangling as usual, especially when talk turns to taxing and spending. This year, they've added a few new ones to the idiom of Washington's capital. Along with ERL and FRED, ``Budget Driver'' is roaming the halls of the Legislature and skidding across budget documents. Clearly, FRED could be one of Budget Driver's many passengers this year while ERL would supply the fuel. A Budget Driver, by the way, is defined as any major demand on the state treasury that is growing due to factors beyond anybody's control, like population growth. 
Resolutions for a skinny new year were taken seriously by more than 30 people who attended a clinic at the University of Illinois Physicians Office. The clinic offered a free body analysis to people willing to hook themselves up to electrodes on Tuesday. The participants, ranging from age 20 to 60, allowed doctors to apply metallic tape and clips to a hand and a foot so they could measure their body fat. ``A lot of people make a vow to themselves at the beginning of the year to lose weight, and especially coming off the holidays,'' said Mike Maggio, spokesman for the University of Illinois Hospital. ``It's a time for New Year's resolutions ... and coming off the goodies,'' Maggio said. The electrodes send electric currents through the skin to measure the amount of tissue resistance, said Dr. Georgia Andrianopoulos, a director of the program. Because fat tissue conducts less than muscle tissue, doctors can use the electrodes to calculate the percentage of body fat. They also can determine the number of calories a person should consume to lower the fat ratio. But does it hurt? ``Not at all,'' said Pam Gaidelis, 23, one of those who waited in line. ``I was kind of scared seeing all the electrodes, but you can't feel anything.'' Ms. Gaidelis said she already lost 40 pounds on her own through diet and exercise, but is looking for a way to keep the fat off. 
Eddie Heywood Jr., a popular jazz pianist who composed ``Canadian Sunset,'' died Monday. He was 73. Heywoodd's version of Cole Porter's ``Begin the Beguine'' was popular in the 1940s, and after being sidelined by problems with his hands, Heywood returned with his composition of ``Canadian Sunset'' and other songs in the mid-1950s. His gentle-sounding tunes often were constructed around nature themes. Heywood was named as a new star by Esquire magazine in 1945 and recorded with vocalists Billie Holliday and Ella Fitzgerald, as well as recording his own albums. 
Art Rush, a Hollywood talent agent who represented Nelson Eddy, Roy Rogers and Dale Evans and many radio-era stars, died Sunday at the age of 81. Rush was the executive producer of many network radio shows, and helped manage the careers of Jackie Gleason, Mary Martin, Vladimir Horowitz, Orson Welles and Eugene Ormandy during the 1930s. As an executive at RCA Victor, he recorded such popular entertainers as Eddy, Jeanette MacDonald, Tommy Dorsey, Lily Pons, Benny Gooodman, Glenn Miller and Igor Stravinsky. The firm Rush founded in 1939, Art Rush Inc., assisted Rogers in the marketing and merchandising of more than 400 products stemming from the cowboy's songs, films and television shows. 
Rush was also involved in franchising more than 500 restaurants Roy Rogers has established throughout the country in association with the Marriott Corp. of Washington D.C. 
Florence A. Hixson, who had a long and distinguished career in the field of nursing and nursing education, died Saturday at age 89. Ms. Hixson, who started her career at Alabama in 1950, initiated programs leading to bachelor of science and master of science degrees in nursing, and in cooperation with the College of Education, a doctor of education degree. Ms. Hixson was assistant director of nursing and a nursing instructor at Abington Memorial Hospital School of Nursing in suburban Philadelphia; an instructor at the Harper Hospital School of Nursing in Detroit, Mich., and at the Samaritan Hospital School of Nursing, Troy, N.Y. She was also assistant director of nursing education at the University of Pennsylvania, and acting dean at the university. Ms. Hixson has been listed in ``Who's Who in America'' and ``Who's Who of American Women.'' During the Eisenhower administration, Ms. Hixson was appointed to the President's Commission on Education. In 1964, Gov. George Wallace appointed her to the Governor's Committee on the Status of Women. She retired in 1970. 
Anita L. Peyton, publisher and general manager of the Carmi Times newspaper in Southern Illinois, died Monday of an apparent heart attack at age 52. Mrs. Peyton helped start the Christmas-time collection and distribution of toys, clothing, food and money through the newspaper to the needy. She formerly worked at the Harrisburg Daily Register. 
Ralph G. Reichhold, 94, a retired artist and writer for The Pittsburgh Press, died Monday at the Courtland Manor Nursing Home. Reichhold's editorial cartoons appeared in national magazines. He created cartoon character Donald Dingbat, a tiny weatherbird that appeared with the newspaper's daily weather forecasts for 37 years. He also drew a panel comic for the newspaper. Reichhold worked for The Pittsburgh Press for 42 years and retired in 1955. 
Nick Virgilio, a New Jersey master of Japanese haiku poetry, died Tuesday after suffering an apparent heart attack while taping a television interview. He was 60. Phil O'Connor, senior ``Nightwatch'' producer, said CBS does not plan to air the interview. Haiku, an unrhymed type of poetry, has three lines that usually contain five, seven and five syllables, respectively. Virgilio's poetry earned him admirers worldwide, according to The Courier-Post. His celebrated ``Lily'' poem was translated by the crown prince of Japan. 
Hollywood legend Bette Davis says disagreements with the director forced her to flee the set of her latest film, ``Wicked Stepmother,'' for ``the good of my future career.'' The 80-year-old actress said director Larry Cohen was unresponsive to her suggestions and unwilling to make changes. After one week of filming, she flew to New York where she stayed for several weeks, recuperating from dental surgery. But she decided not to return. ``He never rehearses actors,'' she complained in Tuesday's editions of the Los Angeles Times. ``He just rehearses the camera. So we work for the camera. I was very uncomfortable in all the scenes he had me play in that week.'' ``People will be horrified at the footage on me,'' Miss Davis said. ``I think that for the good of my future career I honestly had no choice'' but to go public with the story. Cohen called Miss Davis a ``wonderful'' woman and dismissed the criticisms, saying the cast spent hours rehearsing at his home. 
Actress Jane Seymour says she's sticking her neck out by allowing her son and daughter to play the children of Marie Antoinette because the movie in which she portrays the French queen is ``extraordinary.'' In a deal with the producers, Miss Seymour said Tuesday, she secured roles for her daughter, Katie, 6, and son Sean, 3, as Louis Charles and Marie Therese, who were imprisoned with their mother. ``I would normally keep my children away from this kind of thing. If it was a sit-com or a weekly series, I would never let them do it,'' the actress said. ``But this is something extraordinary and historic. It's a huge definitive version of the French Revolution and provides them with a marvelous opportunity to learn a little French and understand the history, too,'' Miss Seymour said from her home in Bath. She gave no details of the deal with the producers. The film in French and English, tentatively called ``The French Revolution,'' will be shot in Paris and Versailles for release in October to mark this year's bicentennial of the French Revolution. Marie Antoinette and her husband, King Louis XVI, were sent to the guillotine in 1793. Miss Seymour starred in the ABC-TV miniseries ``War and Remembrance'' and last year played the Duchess of Windsor and opera diva Maria Callas. 
Princess Diana, her two sons, mother and other family members are spending a week in the British Virgin Islands while Prince Charles stays in England. Emerging from a chartered plane Tuesday in sunny, 85-degree weather, Diana wore a sleeveless, flowered pink dress. Sons Prince William, 6, and Prince Harry, 4, wore shorts. They were vacationing with Diana's mother, Frances Shand-Kydd, and sisters, Lady Sarah McCorquodale and Lady Jane Fellowes, and the sisters' four children. ``This is private holiday treat which Mrs. Shand-Kydd has planned for quite some time,'' said a Buckingham Palace spokesman. Diana's husband, Prince Charles, remained at the estate of his mother, Queen Elizabeth II, in Sandringham, where the royal family celebrated the holidays. 
Pianist Victor Borge, the mirthful maestro who has entertained millions with his blend of music and comedy, celebrated his 80th birthday on the Caribbean island of St. Croix with his wife, Sanna, and family. ``We have all the children and the in-laws and the grandchildren in the house here, 20 in all,'' he said by telephone Tuesday. ``Everything is just dandy. ``I have, from all over the world, received congratulatory messages and flowers _ the house is like a hothouse. It's very charming and exciting and touching.'' The Great Dane, who gained worldwide fame by punctuating his virtuoso piano playing with punchlines, was asked about the secret to his longevity. ``That I'm not dead,'' he replied. More seriously, he said, ``I think it's in the genes. Just good luck, perhaps. My grandmother was 102 years old, my father 85, some of his brothers 95, 92.'' Borge added that he still has the energy to do his quota of 75 to 80 concerts a year around the world. ``That has not changed whatsoever,'' he said. ``It's like a tree that grows and grows, and every year the fruit appears. And I just pick the fruit.'' 
County music singer-songwriter Willie Nelson was named this year's recipient of the televised ``American Music Awards'' special award of merit for career achievement. Nelson, named as the honoree Tuesday, has written hundreds of songs during his career including such hits as ``The Red-Headed Stranger,'' ``On The Road Again,'' and ``Mamas Don't Let Your Babies Grow Up To Be Cowboys.'' He has starred in several films for theatrical and television release, including ``The Red-Headed Stranger,'' ``Honeysuckle Rose'' and ``The Electric Horseman.'' Nelson also has used his leverage inside the music industry to organize the Farm Aid concerts drawing contributions to help down-and-out family farms in the United States. 
U.N. Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar will deliver the traditional Nobel Peace Prize lecture Monday, a month after he received the coveted award on behalf of the U.N. peacekeeping forces. Perez de Cuellar had no time to deliver the lecture the day after the Dec. 10 award ceremony, as is customary, because of the previously scheduled 40th anniversary commemorations in Paris of the U.N. Human Rights Convention. The rescheduled speech was announced Tuesday. Perez de Cuellar was due in Stockholm, Sweden, Jan. 10 to accept the Olof Palme Prize, named for the Swedish prime minister who was fatally shot nearly three years ago. 
Physicians who treat women are being enlisted in a nationwide effort to aid battered women and help break a generational cycle that has caught some American families in a web of violence. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists is sending information to its 28,000 members to heighten their awareness of the problem of domestic violence and better enable them to help abused women. Surgeon General C. Everett Koop, who joined the group for its announcement of the campaign Tuesday, said stopping violence against women is a major part of the effort to end family violence, a cycle that often begins when someone is the victim of abuse and then grows up to become an abuser. ``It's obvious that if you're going to break that chain ... you've got to start with child abuse,'' Koop said. ``But you can't just wait for the three generations to work themselves out. You've got to take care of the elderly abused and you've got to take care of the battered women.'' The physicians' campaign is aimed at the estimated 15 million women who have been beaten, raped or suffered other forms of physical and sexual assault, a total that Koop says grows by 1 million a year. ``It is an overwhelming moral, economic and public health burden that our society can no longer bear,'' Koop said. ``In this country, no man has a license to beat, and get away with it. And no woman is obliged to accept a beating, and suffer because of it.'' Koop noted that help is available from state and national coalitions and social service organizations, law enforcement agencies and the courts, and he encouraged doctors to become part of the crusade against violence. ``We say we are a civilized society,'' Koop said. ``All right, let's act like one and let's stop the violence in our families and let's end the battering of women in this country.'' Koop said, however, he did not advocate mandatory reporting by doctors of abused women. Such reporting, he said, could further harm a woman by prompting retaliation against her or her children at a time when she may not have the financial means to leave her home. The pamphlets and bulletins the group is sending to its members outline the physical signs of abuse and suggest to doctors how to discuss the problem with women who have been abused. The written material includes information about women's legal rights, social services that are available to women and strategies for helping women escape from abusive situations. ``We are providing physicians with the tools they can use to help women escape from such a relationship,'' said Luella Klein, a former president of the physicians' association. ``We don't expect ob-gyns always to treat the pathology of battering, but we expect them to tell women what their rights are under the law and advise a woman how to plan for dealing with her abusive partner.'' Women who have been abused will often have injuries on their head, face, neck, chest, abdomen, breast or arms, she said. Women who are abused when they are pregnant often have abdominal and breast injuries, she added. The doctors are also advised that abused women often complain about headaches, insomnia, choking sensations and stomach, chest, pelvic and back pains, she said. These women, she added, may appear shy, frightened, embarrassed, evasive, anxious or passive, and often cry. 
A man recently paroled from prison grabbed about 15 hostages in a restaurant Tuesday night and was shot and taken into custody after killing one hostage and wounding at least two other people, police said. When the shootout ended at about 9 p.m., a waitress in her 40s was dead and the gunman was in critical condition, police said. Police Officer Joe Berdin and Larimer County Sheriff's Deputy J. Hirokawa were brought to McKee Medical Center with gunshot wounds to the arms, hospital officials said. The trouble began just before 7 p.m. when police responded to a disturbance call at the house of the suspect's girlfriend, who had been assaulted, police Sgt. Ray Miller said. The woman told police the man had gone home, and when police went there, he opened fire on them, wounding Hirokawa, Miller said. Police then chased the man to the nearby Riverhouse Restaurant, where he took about 15 people hostage, Miller said. Police were negotiating with the man by megaphone when he began shooting at about 9 p.m. Miller said the suspect was asking for a plane to fly him to Libya. Miller said the suspect, in his early 30s, had recently been paroled from prison, where he served time for a cocaine distribution charge. 
Backers of the Equal Rights Amendment made it the first order of business for the new Congress but say the real battleground for its adoption is in the state legislatures where it died in 1982. ``Our foremothers never gave up on the right to vote until we won, and we will never give up on the Equal Rights Amendment until we have won,'' Molly Yard, president of the National Organization for Women, told a Capitol Hill news conference. ``We are certainly not giving up,'' said Rep. Don Edwards, D-Calif., who was joined by 128 other House members in co-sponsoring the ERA as House Joint Resolution 1 before the new Congress as it convened on Tuesday. Yard said the campaign for passage would concentrate on state legislatures, where she said women would need to control one-third of the seats, about twice the share they now hold, to ensure the measure's ratification. ``It's shocking to me that on the 200th anniversary of the Constitution, women are still not in it,'' Rep. Patricia Schroeder, D-Colo., said. The nation celebrated the bicentennial of the signing and ratification of the Constitution in 1987 and 1988. The Equal Rights Amendment, which would prohibit sex discrimination, came closest to passage nearly seven years ago, having been approved by Congress and 35 state legislatures. The proposed amendment still needed approval by three more state legislatures when time for its ratification expired on June 30, 1982. It was re-introduced in Congress in 1983, 1985 and 1987 but did not win the two-thirds support needed to be submitted to the states again. The Republican Party has withdrawn its support for the proposed amendment. And President-elect Bush, who once supported the ERA, also has changed his mind. But Yard said she remained hopeful that such a proposal would be adopted before the end of the century. Edwards said he was encouraged by the number of co-sponsors of the proposal, but said he did not know whether it would make it through Congress this time. 
Former White House chief of staff Donald Regan, in a parting shot at President Reagan, says he hopes President-elect Bush ``has learned from Reagan's shortcomings.'' In a paperback re-issue of his insider book, ``For The Record,'' due to be published Feb. 1, Regan praised Bush while inveighing oncemore against the management style of his former boss. While saying he felt confident that Bush had learned from Reagan's successes, Regan said he hoped the president-elect ``has learned from Reagan's shortcomings _ his baffling reluctance to give orders, or even guidance, to his close subordinates, and the tendency to permit some of his advisers to manage the presidency for effect rather than for results.'' The re-issue of Regan's book is scheduled to hit the newsstands and bookstores on Feb. 1. Bush assumes the presidency on Jan. 20. Sheila Tate, a spokeswoman at Bush's transition headquarters here, said that ``to my knowledge, he (Bush) has not solicited advice from Donald Regan. I do believe they have always had a cordial relationship.'' A source in the Bush transition office, declining to be named publicly, said that Bush has not spoken with Regan except during a chance encounter at Burning Tree Country Club, a suburban Maryland golf course. The initial publication of Regan's book last spring caused a stir in Washington, as the former White House chief of staff depicted Reagan as a laid-back president who had difficulty making decisions and who didn't work hard. Reagan and his wife, Nancy, denounced Regan for telling the insider stories. White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater labeled Regan's work ``a kiss-and-tell story in the mold of all books that seek to exploit the presidency or the first family for personal self-interest.'' During a question-and-answer session on Dec. 16 with students at the University of Virginia, Reagan quipped at one point that ``somebody's talking to me about doing a book, and there are some backstage stories that I might enjoy getting out.'' In the new chapter that Regan added to the re-issue of his book, published by St. Martin's Press, Inc., in New York, the former chief of staff also wrote that: _Bush ``cannot survive politically'' if he reneges on his campaign promise to oppose increases in tax rates to cope with the federal budget deficit. _Bush ``is no protectionist'' and predicted that the president-elect will ``work to open markets abroad.'' _Bush will ``almost certainly face the necessity of dealing with a recession,'' perhaps in Bush's first term. ``As long as he listens to his own instincts, and to the voice of his own experience, the American people will be well-served,'' Regan said. He said that Bush ``must bring the White House's relationship with the news media under control, so that he and his people spend the greater part of their time dealing with the reality of the nation's problems, rather than catering to the natural tendency of the media to transform the presidency into entertainment.'' Bush, in fact, signaled last month that he will not follow Reagan's practice of allowing reporters to ask questions during White House picture-taking sessions with visiting foreign leaders. 
Jim Wright, D-Texas, began his second term as House speaker Tuesday, and George Mitchell, D-Maine, started his tenure as Senate majority leader. Here are the other leadership positions in the 101st Congress: 
Majority leader _ Thomas Foley, D-Wash. Majority whip _ Tony Coelho, D-Calif. Chief deputy whip _ David Bonior, D-Mich. Democratic caucus chairman _ William Gray, D-Pa. Democratic caucus vice chairman _ Stenny Hoyer, D-Md. Steering and Policy Committee chairman _ Speaker Wright. Democratic Congressional Committee chairman _ Beryl Anthony Jr., D-Ark. Democratic Study Group chairman _ Martin Sabo, D-Minn. Minority leader _ Bob Michel, R-Ill. Minority whip _ Dick Cheney, R-Wyo. Republican Conference chairman _ Jerry Lewis, Calif. Republican Conference vice chairman _ Bill McCollum, R-Fla. Republican Conference secretary _ Vin Weber, R-Minn. Republican Policy Committee chairman _ Mickey Edwards, R-Okla. Republican Congressional Committee chairman _ Guy Vander Jagt, R-Mich. Republican Research Committee chairman _ Duncan Hunter, R-Calif. Republican Study Committee chairman _ Barbara Vucanovich, R-Nev. 
President pro tempore _ Robert C. Byrd, D-W.Va. Majority whip _ Alan Cranston, D-Calif. Chief deputy whip _ Alan Dixon, D-Ill. Democratic Conference secretary _ David Pryor, D-Ark. Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee chairman _ John Breaux, D-La. Democratic Steering Committee chairman _ Danie Inouye, D-Hawaii. Democratic Policy Committee chairman _ Mitchell. Democratic Policy Committee co-chairman _ Tom Daschle, S.D. Minority Leader _ Bob Dole, R-Kan. Minority whip _ Alan K. Simpson, R-Wyo. Republican Conference chairman _ John Chafee, R-R.I. Republican Conference secretary _ Thad Cochran, R-Miss. Republican Policy Committee chairman _ Bill Armstrong, R-Colo. Republican Senatorial Committee _ Don Nickels, R-Okla. 
Agriculture _ E de la Garza, Texas; Appropriations _ Jamie L. Whitten, Miss.; Armed Services _ Les Aspin, Wis.; Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs _ Henry B. Gonzalez, Texas; Budget _ Leon Panetta, Calif.; District of Columbia _ Ronald V. Dellums, Calif.; Education and Labor _ Augustus F. Hawkins, Calif.; Energy and Commerce _ John D. Dingell, Mich.; Foreign Affairs _ Dante B. Fascell, Florida. Government Operations _ John Conyers, Mich.; House Administration _ Frank Annunzio, Ill.; Interior and Insular Affairs _ Morris K. Udall, Ariz.; Judiciary _ Jack Brooks, Texas; Merchant Marine and Fisheries _ Walter B. Jones, N.C.; Post Office and Civil Service _ William D. Ford, Mich.; Public Works and Transportation _ Glenn M. Anderson, Calif.; Rules _ Claude Pepper, Fla.; Science, Space and Technology _ Robert A. Roe, N.J.; Small Business _ John J. LaFalce, N.Y.; Standards of Official Conduct _ Julian C. Dixon, Calif. Veterans Affairs _ G.V. Montgomery, Miss.; Ways and Means _ Dan Rostenkowski, Ill.; Select Committee on Aging _ Edward R. Roybal, Calif.; Select Committee on Children, Youth and Families, George Miller, Calif.; Select Committee on Hunger, Mickey Leland, Texas; Select Committee on Intelligence _ Louis Stokes, Ohio; Select Committee on Narcotics _ Charles B. Rangel, N.Y.; Joint Economic _ Lee H. Hamilton, Ind. and Sen. Paul S. Sarbanes, Md. 
Agriculture _ Patrick J. Leahy, Vt.; Appropriations _ Robert C. Byrd, W.Va.; Armed Services _ Sam Nunn, Ga.; Banking _ Donald W. Riegle Jr., Mich.; Commerce _ Ernest F. Hollings, S.C.; Energy _ J. Bennett Johnston, La.; Environment _ Quentin N. Burdick, N.D.; Finance _ Lloyd Bentsen, Texas; Foreign Relations _ Claiborne Pell, R.I.; Government Affairs _ John Glenn, Ohio; Judiciary _ Joseph R. Biden Jr., Del.; Labor _ Edward M. Kennedy, Mass. Budget _ Jim Sasser, Tenn.; Rules _ Wendell H. Ford, Ky.; Small Business _ Dale Bumpers, Ark.; Veterans Affairs _ Cranston, Calif.; Intelligence _ David Boren, Okla.; Aging _ David H. Pryor, Ark. 
Glasnost brought a little more color into the lives of Soviet newspaper readers as Izvestia heralded with a front-page splash of green the opening of its pages to foreign advertisers. For decades, the same government daily had railed against capitalism in small, gray type. Now, it was introducing the Western sales pitch. ``French perfumes, French wines and the French effort to find comfort have been well-known to you for a long time,'' proclaimed Pechiney, a French firm that bought all of page five in Tuesday's ground-breaking edition. ``Now you have a chance to get more closely acquainted with industrial France,'' In a front-page announcement, Izvestia said the two pages of ads from European and U.S. companies were the first in a weekly effort ``to give Western businessmen the possibility to enter into direct dialogue with future Soviet partners who are trying to set up contacts with the foreign market.'' West Germany's Dresdner Bank, the first Western bank to open an office in Moscow in 1973, had a quarter of page six with a green stripe matching the splash of green on the eight-page paper's front. The ads represent a sharp turnabout for the central press. Soviet newspapers usually consist of four to six broad sheets of small type crammed from top to bottom of each page. They have not accepted any advertising. In recent years, newspapers such as Moscow News, which is at the forefront of Gorbachev's drive for greater openness and restructuring Soviet society, have begun publishing occasional ads for state-run enterprises. In announcing an agreement Oct. 15 to cooperate on the advertising project with West Germany's Burda magazine, Izvestia called advertising the ``engine of trade.'' State-run enterprises are freer under President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's reforms to buy and sell on the world market in order to attract new technology. But Izvestia said they needed an open exchange of information with foreign firms. ``There are completely new problems for us,'' the paper said. ``One of them, and by far not the last, is business information.'' Karl Schlue, Moscow representative of the Dresdner Bank, said he did not know precisely how much the advertising cost, but that a full page was about $50,000. Payment is in hard currency, which the average Soviet cannot possess legally. Schlue said it was difficult to anticipate how often his company would advertise, or what kind of results it expected. Other advertisers Tuesday included Armand Hammer's Occidental Petroleum, Monsanto, and the Munich-based Mann firm. Most of the firms have permanent representatives in Moscow, and Pechiney provided information about its joint project to build an aluminum factory in Soviet Armenia. The foreign ads in Izvestia almost exclusively explained the companies' business in simple type with few illustrations. There was no change in the format of the rest of the paper. Izvestia said that for the time being, the advertising will be carried once a week in papers distributed in Moscow and abroad. That will make up not less than 600,000 of the paper's total distribution of about 9 million copies. It said the advertising would stress industrial and scientific products to help bolster the Soviet economy, rather than foreign consumer goods that are not for sale in the Soviet Union and cannot be purchased with consumers' non-convertible rubles. State-run firms also are free to advertise on Izvestia's pages, and one placed an ad in Tuesday's edition. The Hydromechanization Trust of the Ministry of Energy and Electrification said it was prepared to work together with foreign companies on industrial projects across the Soviet Union. But ads for Aeroflot, the state-run airline, or items in constant deficit such as toothpaste and tights will not appear, Izvestia said in the Oct. 15 edition. Nor, it said, will ads for the ``latest model of Mercedes, suits by Cardin, or invitations to vacation in Fiji.'' 
The massive amount of classified information pervading the Iran-Contra case is threatening again to delay this month's scheduled start of former presidential aide Oliver L. North's criminal trial. A federal appeals court Tuesday temporarily stayed pre-trial review of North's plans to divulge classified information when his lawyers question high government officials in open court. And the federal judge in the case, Gerhard A. Gesell, on Tuesday turned down a request to further censor classified documents prosecutors want to use as evidence to accommodate objections of intelligence agencies. The decision by the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals here to consider North's motion to permanently bar Gesell from giving prosecutors a summary of the proposed defense testimony could force a delay in the trial, now set for Jan. 31. North is charged along with former national security adviser John M. Poindexter and arms dealers Albert Hakim and Richard V. Secord with conspiring to illegally divert more than $14 million in U.S.-Iran arms-sale profits to the Nicaraguan rebels. The three-judge appeals panel issued an indefinite ``administrative stay'' of Gesell's plan to give independent counsel Lawrence E. Walsh the 162-page defense summary while it considers what the defense called ``grave constitutional issues'' involving North's right to a fair trial. Gesell, meanwhile, refused Walsh's request to make more editing changes in the 300 prosecution exhibits. U.S. intelligence agencies are concerned that sensitive references in the documents that cover some 3,000 pages could disclose covert operations or secret dealings with foreign nations. A ranking administration official said it was too early to assess the full impact of Gesell's ruling on the case against North. But Gesell's latest decision was a fresh reminder that government refusal to disclose certain classified information at trial could scuttle major charges against the former White House aide. Under the Classified Information Procedures Act, the attorney general can decide to seek dismissal of criminal charges to prevent disclosure of secrets that might endanger national security. The administration official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the decision did not spell the end of the case against North but it could bar Walsh from using some of the documents as evidence. Gesell, for instance, is insisting that the names of Israel, Iran and the Central American nations appear in any document despite a government proposal to refer to each nation by a letter. This procedure was used during the 1987 congressional Iran-Contra hearings, even though the true identities of the countries quickly became an open secret. Gesell is known to have raised concerns at the CIA and other agencies about his insistence that government reports be quoted verbatim with only a few modifications to protect sources and methods of intelligence gathering. Walsh's request for a modification of Gesell's Dec. 12 order was filed under court seal Dec. 22 after the independent counsel had conferred with the White House and an interagency task force that is reviewing the classified information at issue. North contends that Gesell's decision to let Walsh look at the summary of his defense strategy will give prosecutors an unfair advantage before the case goes to trial. Lawyers for the former National Security Council aide described the document in court papers as ``a detailed road map to the defense case.'' ``Never has a criminal defendant been compelled to disclose _ before the prosecution has called its first witness _ the details of proposed defense testimony on virtually every disputed factual issue in this case,'' the defense said in papers filed Tuesday. Gesell had proposed to give Walsh the summary by Tuesday afternoon, barring intervention from the appeals court. The case before Circuit Judges Kenneth Starr, James Buckley and David Sentelle is one of several issues that could delay the proceeding. Also looming on the horizon is North's attempt to subpoena President Reagan and Vice President Bush to testify as witnesses. Justice Department officials said Tuesday that a motion to quash the subpoenas could be filed by week's end. The government is expected to resist the subpoenas based on the principle of separation of powers, executive privilege and the need to protect classified information. North, meanwhile, has subpoenaed other administration officials, notably Secretary of State George Shultz and several of his top aides, including Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams, Undersecretary Michael H. Armacost, legal adviser Abraham Sofaer and M. Charles Hill, Shultz's executive assistant. 
The effort by Oliver North to compel President Reagan and President-elect Bush to testify at his Iran-Contra trial has renewed a debate, almost as old as the Union, over ``executive privilege.'' Can a president, or a former one, be forced to testify in a legal case? Courts have provided little guidance, but constitutional experts said Tuesday that North's legal tactic may succeed. No sitting president ever has testified in court in a criminal trial, but several have provided testimony or what might be considered the equivalent. The personal stakes are high for North. The former White House aide is charged with theft, conspiracy to defraud the government and several other felonies in the case involving the support of Nicaraguan rebels with money from the sale of U.S. weapons to Iran. His trial is scheduled to begin Jan. 31 _ just 11 days after Bush is to succeed Reagan. Besides Reagan and Bush, subpoenas also have been issued for other key figures in the Reagan administration, including Secretary of State George P. Shultz and four other State Department officials. The man who first tried to force a president to testify was Aaron Burr, a former vice president who stood trial in 1807 on charges of treason. Burr sought to force Thomas Jefferson, the president under whom he had served, to testify at the trial. Jefferson resisted. But Chief Justice John Marshall, presiding over the trial, ruled against Jefferson. The president eventually avoided having to appear by releasing some information Burr had sought. The closest the Supreme Court has come to ruling on the issue presented by North's subpoena came in the Watergate tapes decision of 1974, in a case called Nixon vs. U.S. The court then ruled, 8-0, that President Richard M. Nixon had to comply with a special prosecutor's subpoena seeking the surrender of White House tape recordings. ``The general assertion of privilege must yield to the demonstrated, specific need for evidence in a pending criminal trial,'' the high court ruled 15 years ago. Jerome Barron, a law professor at George Washington University here, said Tuesday the 1974 decision is a strong precedent for North. ``Whether Mr. Reagan or Mr. Bush can be subpoenaed was resolved in Nixon vs. U.S., and the answer is yes,'' Barron said. ``If the evidence (sought by North) is material, I think Reagan and Bush can be required to appear,'' Barron said. On the other hand, unnamed Justice Department sources were quoted by The Washington Post as saying that Nixon vs. U.S. offers support for fighting subpoenas of Reagan and Bush. They said the Supreme Court emphasized that its Watergate-tapes decision did not deal with a claim of privilege based on national security grounds. Justice Department and White House officials have said they will try to have the subpoenas thrown out. Stanley Brand, a Washington lawyer who once served as general counsel to the House of Representatives, said North may succeed. ``My sense is North has a good claim. The president was involved in the process, and one of North's defenses is that he was serving the president by following orders,'' Brand said. In 1975, then-President Gerald R. Ford gave a videotaped deposition in the trial of Lynette ``Squeaky'' Fromme, who was convicted of trying to assassinate Ford. The videotape was played for jurors at Fromme's trial. While in office, President Jimmy Carter provided videotaped testimony in two criminal prosecutions. 
Memo to Michael Dukakis: If you're thinking of making another run at the presidency in 1992, check the record. Only once in this century has a defeated presidential nominee won the office on his second try. That one was Richard Nixon. Dukakis announced in Boston Tuesday that he won't try for a fourth term as governor of Massachusetts when this one ends in 1990. He did not drop the other shoe: whether he will make another run at the presidency or, on the other extreme, get out of politics altogether. He acknowledged, however, that ``it is very difficult to run for the presidency as an incumbent governor.'' Dukakis would have plenty of company among presidential aspirants who subscribe to the ``if at first you don't succeed ...'' school of politics. The record is fat with candidates of the Harold Stassen stripe who don't take a dearth of votes for a hint. Ronald Reagan sought the Republican party's presidential nomination in 1968, 1972 and 1976 before finally getting it in 1980; George Bush had tried in 1980, too. But when a candidate gets the nomination and then loses, his party is loath to let him try again. The modern exceptions are William Jennings Bryan who was nominated three times _ twice in this century _ Thomas Dewey and Adlai Stevenson. There were boomlets for a third nomination for Dewey in 1952 and Stevenson in 1960, but they came to nought. After serving twice as vice president in the Dwight Eisenhower administration, Nixon ran and lost in 1960 against John F. Kennedy. He spent a good part of the next eight years collecting Republican IOUs with almost ceaseless speechmaking and was nominated again in 1968. Losing a presidential election is more often than not a fast slide into political oblivion for the candidate. Gerald Ford, who became vice president and then president without benefit of elections, tried for a full term on his own and was defeated by Jimmy Carter in 1976. He remains one of the most visible former presidents because of his affinity for celebrity golf tournaments. Ford also turned into a one-man corporation, lending his name to boards of directors, lecturing for fees of $15,000 and more, entering into a partnership to buy radio stations and receiving $1 million for his memoirs. Carter was defeated after his one term by Reagan. He moved back to Plains, Ga., but not as a peanut farmer. Instead, he took up woodworking, traveling, meeting with world leaders, climbing Mount Kilimanjaro, becoming a visiting professor at Emory University and devoting time to the Carter Presidential Center where he hosts international conferences. Walter Mondale's disappearance from the spotlight has been so complete that Democrats rarely mention the man who lost to Reagan in a 1984 landslide. ``Oh, I miss it a little,'' Mondale said in Atlanta during the Democratic National Convention last summer, but added: ``You know, I had my say, and I don't miss the 18-hour days.'' Mondale practices law in Washington and Minneapolis and there's been some talk _ not from him _ that he may try to reclaim his Senate seat from Minnesota in 1990. Barry Goldwater, defeated by Lyndon Johnson in 1964, cooled his political heels for four years, then was re-elected to the Senate without the seniority he had built up in the previous two terms. Hubert Humphrey, who had been vice president for four years when he lost to Nixon in 1968, spent a little while as a professor at Macalester College and the University of Minnesota, then won back his Senate seat in 1970. He ran again for the Democratic nomination in 1972 but withdrew in the face of overwhelming odds at the party's convention. He died of cancer in 1978. McGovern, the South Dakota senator who won the 1972 nomination but lost to Nixon, stayed in the Senate until 1980 when he lost his seat. He made a third try for the presidency in 1984 in a primary campaign that lasted less than six months before he dropped out. The other presidential losers took their lumps and started anew. After his second consecutive defeat for president, in 1948, Dewey said,``I have been graduated at a comparatively early age to the role of elder statesman, which someone has aptly defined as a politician who is no longer a candidate for any office.'' A year later he wrote a friend: ``Nothing could arise now or in the future that would lead me to be the nominee of our party in 1952. My decision on this matter is as certain and final as death and the staggering New Deal taxes.'' After more such disclaimers, he ran in 1950 for his third term as governor of New York and won. Dewey died in 1971. Stevenson, the eloquent but reluctant Democratic candidate in 1952 and 1956, was appointed by President Kennedy to be U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, a post he held until his death in 1965. When he lost the second time, Stevenson recalled the Lincoln line that he felt like a little boy who had stubbed his toe in the dark: ``Too old to cry, but it hurt too much to laugh.'' 
Crying ``Let me stay with my mommy, please!'' 12-year-old Ximena Vicario was wrested from the woman who took her in as an infant, knowing that the girl's real mother was likely killed by security forces. The wrenching scene Tuesday, replayed on afternoon and evening television newscasts, dredged up bitter memories of the eight-year military dictatorship that ended in 1983. During those years, at least 8,960 Argentines were arrested and presumed killed as part of a brutal crackdown on leftist subversion. Ximena's parents, Juan Carlos Vicario and Stella Maris Gallichio de Vicario, were arrested in February 1977 and never seen again. They ``disappeared,'' as Argentines say. Then about eight months old, Ximena was handed over to a state orphanage where Susana Siciliano worked. An identity tag stated the baby's name, and said she was the daughter of a subversive, according to court records. Ms. Siciliano took the baby home and renamed her Romina Paola. In 1981, she legally adopted the child. Three years later, Darwinia Rosa Monaco de Gallichio found out what had happened to her granddaughter and began legal proceedings to get her back. She was supported in her efforts by the human rights group Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo, which estimates that about 300 babies were born in or taken along with their mothers to clandestine detention centers, and put up for adoption after the mothers were killed. The group has helped reunite about 50 children with their biological families. A federal appeals court ruled recently that Ms. Siciliano must give up the child. Police took her and Ximena to court Tuesday, where Federal Judge Juan Fegoli gave the girl to her grandmother after more than seven hours of talks with both sides and with psychologists. ``They took away my daughter,'' Ms. Siciliano cried as she walked out of Fegoli's office. Ximena, dark-haired and teary-eyed, told reporters, ``I don't want them to take me from my home, or put me on a program of visits wtih obligatory hours and dates, like the children of separated parents have.'' ``I'm content to have another grandmother ... I want my grandmother to come and see me every time she wants,'' but at the house of Ms. Siciliano, she said. ``I'm going to escape if they take me away.'' Mrs. Gallichio lives in Rosario, 190 miles from Buenos Aires. Ms. Siciliano knew Ximena's background from the start, and hid those facts when she applied for adoption, court records show. Ms. Siciliano, who had said Ximena had been abandoned by her maid, faces charges of abduction of a minor and falsification of records. An attorney for Ms. Siciliano said she will appeal Ximena's custody to the Supreme Court. Ximena's case reminded many of ``El Caso Juliana,'' or ``The Juliana Case,'' that in its own way tightened heartstrings across this South American country several months ago. Juliana Trevino, 10, at first was ordered taken from her adoptive parents, and then returned. Jose and Carmen Trevino never hid the child's background, suspected she might have been the daughter of a ``disappeared'' couple, adopted her legally and worked with human rights groups to establish her identity. Ximena's case is much more typical, and calls to mind the 1986 Oscar-winning movie ``The Official Story,'' in which an Argentine family adopts the daughter of a couple executed by police. 
President Reagan will undergo surgery in Washington Saturday for a long-standing and worsening condition that causes the ring finger of his left hand to bend inward and resist straightening. The president will enter Walter Reed Army Hospital on Friday and is expected to return to the White House on Sunday, Dr. John Hutton, the White House physician, announced Tuesday. Hutton said the president will be operated on for a disease known as Dupuytren's contracture. ``This procedure should not interrupt his normal schedule, other than the obvious presence of a dressing on the left hand,'' the doctor said. ``The president's contracture was minimal but present when he took office in 1981, and has been followed over the past eight years,'' he said. ``Within the past year, it has progressed to the degree that surgical therapy is now necessary.'' He said the surgery is expected to take two to three hours. The president's arm will be put to sleep, but no general anaesthetic is planned, he said. Dr. Charles Lane, a hand specialist in private practice in Beverly Hills, said the cause of Dupuytren's contracture is not known. The disease is named for a French surgeon and anatomist who described it in 1833. It strikes men more often than women, but as many as one in every five people over age 60 are likely to be afflicted with it, according to information provided by the hand surgery section of the orthopedic department at Walter Reed. Reagan is 77. ``It pulls the finger down so the finger can't be straightened,'' Lane said. ``So the finger gets in the way, particularly for such things _ which might be a problem for Mr. Reagan _ as shaking hands.'' ``Also, it's hard when you shave and try to get your hand in your pockets,'' he said. The curving of the fingers is caused by thickening of the gristle below the skin, Lane said. He said the operation, although delicate, is not particularly risky. The president and first lady are to fly to the White House on Thursday after two weeks of relaxing at their new Bel Air home in Los Angeles and visiting friends in Palm Springs. It will be Reagan's first surgery since he had an operation for an enlarged prostate in January 1987. He also underwent surgery in July 1985 for cancer of the colon and has been operated on for skin cancer. In the past, Reagan has gone to Bethesda Naval Hospital, in the Maryland suburbs just outside Washington. Deputy White House Press Secretary Roman Popadiuk said Walter Reed was chosen because the doctors who would do the operation were located there. Hutton said the physicians involved would be Dr. George Bogumill of George Town University, a consultant at Walter Reed; Col. Alan Smith and Maj. Paul Perlik of the Hand Service at Walter Reed; and himself. The anesthesiologist will be Lt. Col. Charles Gandy. Lt. Col. Lawrence Mohr of the White House Medical Unit and members of the Department of Medicine at Walter Reed will take part as consultants. The procedure is scheduled to begin at 7:30 a.m. EST. Hutton said the president is expected to be walking around by afternoon. 
An estimated 1,000 guests, paying $1,000 to $2,500 a plate to dine with President and Mrs. Reagan, will feast on lobster, veal, truffles and duck tonight at a fund-raising event for the Nancy Reagan Center for teen-aged drug abusers. The event, billed as the only welcome home party to be held for the Reagans before the president leaves office Jan. 20 and returns to California, will feature entertainment by singer Frank Sinatra and comedian Don Rickles. Television personality Merv Griffin will be master of ceremonies for the event, to be held at the Beverly Hilton hotel. The president will speak. An announcement by the hotel described the fund raiser as a joint effort of Griffin, the Reagans and hotel magnate Barron Hilton and said it was expected to raise $1 million. Backers of the Nancy Reagan Center are seeking to raise $10 million to buy and renovate a former hospital in the San Fernando Valley. They have reportedly raised $3 million. The center will be a residential treatment facility for drug abusers aged 12 to 18 and is an outgrowth of the first lady's ``Just Say No'' campaign. In addition to a wide variety of California wines, the 125 waiters at the black-tie dinner will serve such appetizers as lobster tails in saffron sauce, steak tartare and shrimp sauteed in garlic. The main course will be tournedos of veal topped with Mendocino duck livers and truffles. To top it all off, each guests gets a candy-filled box made of sugar with the Reagans' picture silk-screened onto it. An anticipated 950 guests are paying $10,000 for a table of 10. An additional 65, who will also attend a reception with the Reagans, are paying $25,000 for a similar table. 
President Reagan says his new ``whistleblower'' bill will protect federal employes from reprisals for reporting wrongdoing and at he same time prevent undue harassment of agency heads about legitimate personnel decisions. A Democratic sponsor of similar legislation which the president vetoed in October, however, says Reagan's version is insufficient and ``probably irrelevant'' because George Bush will be president on Jan. 20. Reagan's proposal is nearly identical to current law, Rep. Patricia Schroeder, D-Colo., said in a telephone interview. ``I don't think there's anybody except the president who thinks that's adequate,'' she said. ``The quacking duck has laid an egg.'' An aide to Rep. Frank Horton, R-N.Y., who co-sponsored last year's bill with Schroeder, said the lawmaker had not seen Reagan's legislation, but was pleased that it had been proposed. ``I think it's important, the Congress thinks it's important, and I hope we can all sit down and get a bill that can become law,'' aide Donald Upson quoted Horton as saying. Schroeder and Horton reintroduced the vetoed version of the bill on Tuesday, the first day of the congressional session. In vetoing the original bill, Reagan said it ``would have redesigned the whistleblower protection process so that employees who are not genuine whistleblowers could manipulate the process to their advantage simply to delay or avoid appropriate adverse personnel actions.'' In a message to Congress accompanying the new bill, he said, ``The legislation protects from reprisal federal employees who expose wrongdoing within the government. It also ensures that federal personnel managers are not burdened with routinely defending appropriate personnel decisions.'' ``Federal employees who blow the whistle on fraud, waste, abuse, and violations of the law help to ensure that the federal government uses American taxpayers' dollars effectively and efficiently,'' he said. ``The nation's laws must encourage such reports and protect those who make them from reprisal.'' The vetoed bill would have required federal employes only to show that whistle-blowing was a factor in their discharge or reassignment, rather than a ``significant'' or ``dominant'' factor, in order to prove they were discriminated against. Reagan said his bill would give federal employees the right to initiate a proceeding before the Merit Systems Protection Board to contest any action they considered a reprisal for whistle-blowing. It also would give preference to whistle-blowers who seek transfers to other jobs comparable to the ones they hold. It calls for an Office of Special Counsel to protect federal employees by seeking orders from the Merit Systems Protection Board to set aside actions taken against employees until the employees' case has been heard. Employees would have the right to seek review by a federal court if they do not win their case before the board. Unlike the earlier bill, however, it does not call for the special counsel to go to court to seek review of disputes to which his office is a party. Reagan said this was an infringement of the president's constitutional power to settle differences within the executive branch of government. 
Federal prosecutors unleashed a tough new law in their war on drug-dealing street thugs, hoping to send a repeat drug offender accused of possessing 150 grams of crack to prison with no chance of getting out. Richard Van Winrow, a 21-year-old reputed gang member, pleaded innocent Tuesday to three drug-related charges at his arraignment before U.S. District Judge Consuelo Marshall. ``The new law is being used to target gang members in the hopes of reducing drug sales and consumption,'' said the prosecutor, Special Assistant U.S. Attorney Lisa Lench. ``There's a hope there will be an impact on the street-gang drug problem.'' The charges against Winrow are believed to be the first filed under the anti-drug law President Reagan signed in November, Ms. Lench said. The law requires federal judges to impose life sentences with no hope of parole on defendants convicted of drug trafficking under certain circumstances. In Winrow's case, the circumstances are that he has at least two convictions on felony drug-related charges and was holding at least 50 grams of crack cocaine when he was arrested, the prosecutor said. Winrow's lawyer, Deputy Public Defender Kevin Brehm, said the law is too harsh. He said it is unfair that someone with three convictions for possessing cocaine, as Winrow has, faces the same sentence as someone convicted at least twice previously of drug trafficking. Others who can be sentenced under the law include defendants with at least two felony drug convictions who are then convicted in federal court of possessing for sale at least 1 kilogram of heroin, 5 kilos of cocaine powder or 100 kilos of marijuana. A kilogram equals 2.2 pounds. ``This prosecution, and future prosecutions, are designed to convince the drug dealers on the streets that we are not kidding and they are not going to slip out of it,'' said John Gordon, head of the Gang Drug-Trafficking Task Force in the U.S. attorney's office here. Winrow is charged with one count of possession with the intent to distribute cocaine, one count of carrying and using a firearm in relation to the first charge and one count of possessing a firearm as an ex-convict. A March 7 trial date was set for the Los Angeles man, who remained in custody without bail. Winrow was convicted three times in 1987 for possession of cocaine and was sentenced in state court to three years' probation and 180 days in jail, said Ms. Lench, a Justice Department prosecutor assigned to a joint federal, state and local street gang task force in Los Angeles. The task force was formed last year to combat the Los Angeles area's gang and drug problem. Last year, more than 330 people in Los Angeles County were slain in gang-related violence, which authorities contend is often linked to the drug trade. Winrow was arrested on Dec. 8 for investigation of possessing about 150 grams of crack, the potent, smokable, highly addictive form of cocaine, with the intent to distribute it, Ms. Lench said. Brehm said he may challenge the constitutionality of the new federal law if Winrow is convicted. He also said he would investigate whether Winrow was being prosecuted selectively. But Ms. Lench said Winrow was not singled out unfairly: ``He happens to be the first who meets the criteria.'' 
The U.S. dollar closed sharply lower against the Japanese yen Wednesday, while the Tokyo Stock Exchange's leading index climbed to another record high in its half-day 1989 opening session. The dollar closed at 124.05 yen, down 1.85 yen from Friday's close of 125.90 yen. After opening at 123.98 yen, the currency moved in a range of 123.80-124.35 yen. Currency dealers said the dollar's fall followed a similar trend in overseas markets. The Nikkei Stock Average of 225 selected issues gained 84.66 points, or 0.28 percent, and closed at 30,243.66, a record high. The index gained 88.74 points in early trading, and kept most of that gain throughout the half-day session. ``Trading started off pretty well for the first session of the year,'' said a dealer with Nomura Securities. Investors are still expecting domestic interest rates to stay lower, encouraging buying orders, the dealer said. The Tokyo Stock Exchange opened Wednesday after finishing last year's trading on Dec. 28. Currency dealers said the dollar's plunge in Tokyo followed a similar trend in overseas markets. A dealer with a foreign bank said some speculative investors were sitting on the sidelines ahead of the release of the U.S. jobless rate for December, due Friday. 
Amnesty International today condemned Turkey for its ``appalling human rights records,'' saying it has received almost daily reports since November of political prisoners being tortured. The London-based rights organization says in a report released today that the Turkish government has begun a public relations campaign to improve its image abroad, but has taken no substantial steps to end the torturing of political detainees. Amnesty said 250,000 political prisoners have been detained in Turkey this decade, and ``almost all of them were tortured.'' Thousands were imprisoned for non-violent political or religious activities, 60,000 were convicted after unfair trails, more than 700 death sentences were imposed and at least 200 prisoners died in custody, many alleged to be the result of torture, the organization said. Amnesty said it sent urgent appeals to the Turkish government in November and December, but it said Turkey has made no apparent effort to change the ``brutal reality of torture, deaths in custody, political imprisonment and unfair trials.'' The group said that six months ago it gave Turkish authorities the names of 229 men and women who had died in custody in the preceding 7{ years, but ``the authorities have provided no explanation whatsoever for 144 of the deaths.'' The report says, ``Most reported cases of torture and deaths in custody occur within the initial period of detention when detainees are held incommunicado and interrogated.'' It says the prisoners are tortured to obtain ``confessions,'' and as a form of pre-trial punishment. The most frequently used methods are beatings with fists, feet, truncheons or other tools, on any part of the body. The systematic beating of the soles of the feet, or falaka, is the traditional method, the report says. Among specific cases described by Amnesty is that of Sadik Celebi, who was detained Nov. 16. Authorities provided no information about his whereabouts until Nov. 26, when they delivered his body to his family, the report says. Officials said Celebi died in an armed encounter with guerrilla forces, but relatives said his body was covered with bruises in addition to the bullet wounds, the report says. Amnesty quoted a Mardin State Hospital official as saying Celebi had been dead since at least Nov. 22, the day before the guerrilla encounter alleged by the authorities. It also cited Hasan Hakki Erdogan, who died in police custody in Istanbul in 1984. Police said he died of kidney and heart failure. Amnesty said it was only after five police officers were convicted last month of torturing the prisoner that authorities acknowledged he had been tortured. Turkey ratified the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture in February and the U.N. Convention against Torture in August. ``Despite these positive moves and repeated claims that human rights are respected in Turkey, the authorities appear reluctant to take even the most elementary practical steps to eradicate human rights abuses and have failed to implement the provisions of the treaties,'' Amnesty said. An Amnesty International delegation discussed human rights with government officials in Turkey in June. In August, the organization sent the government a memorandum on its concerns and recommendations for preventing further abuses. In November, it published a report on its concerns. Turkey has not responded to the recommendations in the memorandum or the report, Amnesty said. ``Instead, it has conducted a worldwide public relations campaign and Turkish embassies in several countries have provided Amnesty International with largely incomplete and unsatisfactory explanations for a range of human rights abuses.'' 
The dollar fell sharply against the Japanese yen today on 1989's first trading day in Tokyo, while the stock market's leading index set a record high for the third consecutive trading session. The dollar, which ended 1988 trading at 125.90 yen, opened at 123.98 yen today and closed at 124.05 yen, down 1.85 yen from last Friday's close. It ranged between 123.80 yen and 124.35 yen. The U.S. currency's plunge resulted from massive dollar-selling after excessive dollar-buying toward the end of last year, following similar trends on overseas markets, said a dealer with the Bank of Tokyo, speaking on condition of anonymity. ``Trading today was directionless mainly because it was lacking market-affecting news,'' he said, adding that the rate stabilized at around the 124-yen level today. The majority of speculative investors remained on the sidelines to await U.S. unemployment figures for December, due to be announced Friday, he added. The dealer said the dollar-yen rate was unlikely to fluctuate much before release of the figure. The 225-issue Nikkei Stock Exchange closed this year's first half-day session at a record high of 30,243.66 points after gaining 84.66 points, or 0.28 percent. The index gained 88.74 points in early trading and maintained most of that gain. The Nikkei had set records of 30,050.93 on Dec. 27 and 30,159.00 on Dec. 28, in 1988's final session. ``Trading started off pretty good for the first session of the year,'' said a dealer with Nomura Securities, speaking on condition of anonymity. He said investors were expecting continuation of low domestic interest rates and oil prices, two major factors encouraging share-buying. Volume traded on the first section was estimated at 350 million shares. 
A fire in a turbine building at the Oconee Nuclear Station caused operators to shut down one of its three reactors, a utility company spokeswoman said. Tuesday night's fire on the non-nuclear part of the plant was extinguished by a Duke Power Co. fire brigade. The ``unusual event'' posed no danger to plant workers or to the public, spokeswoman Mary Boyd said. Workers were bringing Unit 1 on-line when an electrical breaker associated with the reactor's coolant pumps apparently caught fire, station manager Mike Tuckman said. The unit had been automatically shut down Monday by what is known as a ``reactor trip,'' which he said occurs several times a year. When the fire occurred, operators manually took the unit off-line and ``de-energized'' the four reactor coolant pumps, which under normal conditions are used to carry heat away from the hot reactor core. Tuckman said natural circulation of cooling water continued in the reactor until one pump was re-started about 2{ hours after the fire was put out. There was never any danger of core overheating, he said. The ``unusual event,'' the least-serious of four emergency nuclear plant classifications, began at 7:45 p.m., but Tuckman said the situation remained stable. Nuclear Regulatory Commission inspectors were at the plant Tuesday night monitoring the situation, Tuckman said. Ms. Boyd said workers would have to inspect the damage to electric equipment before company officials can estimate when the unit will go back into operation. Units 2 and 3 at Oconee continued normal operation. 
An Oregon Air National Guard F-4 Phantom jet fighter crashed into the Pacific Ocean on a training mission Tuesday, killing one crew member and leaving the pilot in serious condition, authorities said. Both crewmen suffered from hypothermia, or subnormal body temperature, and multiple fractures after ejecting from the fighter as it plunged into the Pacific about 10:30 a.m. 30 miles off Tillamook Bay, authorities said. The plane's weapons systems officer, 1st Lt. Mark A. Baker, 30, of Beaverton, was picked up at 1:45 p.m. and died about eight hours later at Emanuel Hospital &amp; Health Center in Portland, National Guard spokesman Mike Allegre said. The pilot, 2nd Lt. Mike Markstaller, 24, of Portland, was picked up shortly before noon. He was in serious condition suffering from hypothermia, said Emanuel spokeswoman Lisa Hall. A spokesman at McChord Air Force Base in Tacoma, Wash., Staff Sgt. Skip Wiseman, said the jet was on a training mission out of the Oregon Air National Guard base in Portland. The pilot declared an in-flight emergency shortly before the crash, and a pilot in an accompanying aircraft reported seeing two parachutes as the crew bailed out, Wiseman said. 
Gov. Michael Dukakis says his decision to forgo a chance for a record fourth term has nothing to do with his prospects in national politics, but admitted it's ``exceedingly difficult'' to run for president as governor. With two years remaining in his term, Dukakis unexpectedly announced Tuesday he would not seek re-election in 1990. He parried questions about his political future, however, saying only he intended to be active in national affairs and would not rule out another run for the White House. ``Public policy and public service is what I'm all about, it's what I love,'' Dukakis, 55, told a crowded news conference.``I've loved this office, and I still do.'' The defeated Democratic presidential candidate said his decision not to seek an unprecedented fourth term as Massachusetts' governor was not related to the 1988 presidential campaign or to a possible 1992 rematch against President-elect Bush. He acknowledged, however, that it was ``exceedingly difficult'' to mount a national political campaign while exercising executive authority and defending his long record as governor. ``I think the deliberate distortions about Massachusetts ... were increasingly difficult to defend,'' said Dukakis, whose initially strong campaign withered under Republican attacks on his gubernatorial record on crime, the environment and other issues. Franklin D. Roosevelt was the last sitting governor to win the White House in 1932. When asked whether he intends to run for president in 1992, Dukakis said, ``I've learned _ occasionally painfully _ never to say `never' in politics.'' However, the governor, who has ruled out a run for Congress, said it was ``much too early'' to discuss 1992. Political analyst William Schneider of the American Enterprise Institute, a Democratic think tank in Washington, said Dukakis' decision was consistent with another run for the presidency. ``But it is regarded with some dismay, among Democrats, because the conventional wisdom is that he was a poor candidate who ran a poor campaign,'' Schneider said. ``He's got to change that perception, to let people know that he has changed, that he learned something.'' Elaine Kamarck, a Democratic Party activist in New York City, said Dukakis made a smart move if he intends to run for president again, adding, ``Now, I'm not sure that's what this means.'' She also said there is ``an undercurrent of anger'' within the party. ``There is some feeling this could have been a Democratic year and he blew it,'' she said. ``If he runs again, I don't know how he copes with that.'' Dukakis aides were divided over the likelihood that he would seek the White House again. ``I have heard nothing that Michael Dukakis has said publicly or privately, even one-on-one, that would bow in that direction,'' said S. Stephen Rosenfeld, a presidential campaign aide who now serves as Dukakis' chief of staff. But Paul Pezzella, who worked with Rosenfeld on the campaign and now serves as his deputy, said: ``I think he'd like another whack at it.'' The announcement broke a political logjam in Massachusetts politics and touched off immediate speculation about the new landscape in the Democratic Party here and in Washington. In recent weeks, Dukakis had been urged by Democrats to announce his intentions so they could begin making plans. ``It seemed to me desirable to make the decision now, rather than later,'' Dukakis said. Among Democrats expected to consider a run for governor are Boston Mayor Raymond L. Flynn, former state Attorney General Francis X. Bellotti and U.S. Rep. Joseph P. Kennedy II, along with conservative state Rep. John Flood. If he completes his current term, Dukakis would surpass Revolutionary War patriot John Hancock as the longest-serving governor in Massachusetts history. Hancock held the office for 11 years. 
Conductor Phillipe Entremont says he's resigning from the Denver Symphony because budget cuts made his vision of the orchestra's future ``like a bird being shot in midair.'' Entremont has been principal conductor of the DSO since 1986 and music director since 1987. He said Tuesday his resignation from the posts is effective in June, the end of the season. Entremont, 54, also is a concert pianist, and conductor of the Vienna Chamber Orchestra and director of the Orchestra Colonne de Paris. He said he believed the DSO was ``progressing at a wonderful rate'' toward the artistic goals he had set, but plans to trim its schedule because of cuts to the artistic budget threaten ``to bring the orchestra 10 years back.'' ``With the division of opinion between myself and the board regarding the orchestra's musical goals, I had no other choice (but to resign),'' he said. ``I never cheat artistic matters.'' The DSO has struggled financially in recent seasons, and in September the symphony board announced it would seek protection under Chapter 11 of the federal bankruptcy code. A panel appointed by Mayor Federico Pena studied the situation and recommended a budget for next season of $6.5 million, $800,000 less than the 1988-89 budget. Entremont said he had seen no encouraging signs in the last few months that the board saw the orchestra as a major international orchestra. He also criticized state government for giving insufficient support to the arts. ``This orchestra I think deserves much better than it got. It's really a first-class orchestra,'' he said. ``It was like a bird being shot in midair.'' DSO president Chris Dunworth said the board accepted Entremont's resignation with regret, and planned to meet today to initiate a search for his successor. 
Safdar Hashmi, one of India's most popular street theater directors, was beaten to death because he refused to stop a play supporting Marxist candidates in municipal elections, police said. A member of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's Congress Party and three others were arrested and charged with murder, they said. Hashmi, 34 and a founding member of the Communist Party of India, died Monday night, two days after he was beaten unconscious in Sahibabad, where his troupe had been performing. The town is about 12 miles northeast of New Delhi. Doctors said Hashmi suffered a broken skull and massive internal bleeding. Mukesh Sharma, a Congress Party candidate in the municipal election, and three supporters were arrested Monday and charged with murder, police said. Leading Indian artists and opposition politicians are demanding an inquiry. ``What was characteristic of his life was characteristic also of his death,'' said the pro-government Times of India newspaper said in an editorial. ``He was the victim of the same forces he had fought all his life. Safdar's murder is a reminder that what is happening today is not just criminalization of politics but that politics have been taken over by criminals.'' Hashmi organized the street theater troupe in 1973 and it has staged more than 4,000 performances across India, most of them dealing with social problems such as dowry death, government corruption, communalism and problems of the working class. 
Marine police in two patrol boats killed one of six heavily armed pirates in a shootout six miles from the Philippines border, authorities said today. Marine Police Cmdr. Zainal Abidin told reporters the patrol boats raced to the area Tuesday on receiving information that the pirates were sighted in a boat near Marakin island in the Sulu Sea off Semporna, 1,050 miles east of Kuala Lumpur. On seeing the police, the pirates opened fire. Five of them escaped in the boat, but the body of one pirate, identified only as Bangku, 30, was recovered with two revolvers and ammunition. All the pirates were believed to be Malaysians. 
``I've learned _ occasionally painfully _ never to say `never' in politics.'' _ Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis, asked whether he intends to run for president in 1992. 
``When somebody has enough to dress himself nicely, he wants to change clothes every day. When he can change clothes every day, he wants to change in the morning, at noon and in the afternoon and before going to bed also. This is the system that governs capitalist societies.'' _ Cuban President Fidel Castro, on the 30th anniversary of the revolution that ousted rightist dictator Fulgencio Batista and swept Castro to power. 
``It appeared he felt sorry for her. He kept her in the basement for 3{ years. His reason was that he loved her. He didn't want to part with her.'' _ Canton Township police Detective Richard Pomorski, on Leonard Tyburski, who is accused of killing his wife and hiding her body in a freezer in their suburban Detroit home. 
The captain of a ferry that sank on New Year's Day with the loss of 79 lives claims the crew of the naval patrol boat that was towing his boat was drunk. The mishap off the Caribbean coast was Guatemala's worst maritime disaster. Late Tuesday, the captain of the ferry, who is charged with negligent homocide in the case, blamed the navy crew for the accident during an interview in a National Police jail in this city. The captain, Juan Pablo Esquivel, said those on the navy ship, which he said included non-navy personnel, were ``celebrating on deck'' during the towing operation. He said he smelled alcohol on the breath of a machinist who boarded his packed ferry from the navy vessel to check the motor. The ferry skipper said that after eight minutes of towing, the navy vessel ``made a brusque acceleration'' that caused the ferry to flip over. Capt. Rigoberto Kiste, of the Puerto Barrios naval base, said by telephone that he could not officially respond to the charges because the navy's investigation was continuing. But earlier Tuesday, another officer at the local naval base denied that the patrol vessel, No. 654, was at fault and said the ferry captain must shoulder prime responsibility. A tugboat captain and other witnesses told The Associated Press that the ferry was towed with too short a cable and that the patrol boat did not slow down even after the ferry started listing. ``The wake of the patrol boat was hitting hard against our bow, and our bow was down in the water. You can't keep a ship under control when its bow is down in the water,'' said Ladislao Ponce, 47, who has worked for 19 years as a tugboat captain and who was a passenger on the ferry. Capt. Anibal Giron, second in command at Puerto Barrios naval base and a graduate of the U.S. Coast Guard Academy, remarked: ``When people are in grief, when they've suffered loss, they look to affix blame immediately. Our business is saving lives. We are as upset about this as anyone.'' Giron said the navy was investigating, but the preliminary conclusion is that Esquivel, the ferry captain, was mainly to blame. Ponce was traveling with his wife and two daughters Sunday when the ferry Justo Rufino Barrios II flipped and sank in Amatique Bay while making the 16-mile run from Livingston to Puerto Barrios. Ponce's wife and one daughter drowned. Ponce said the ferry lost power either from lack of fuel or engine trouble and drifted an hour until a naval patrol boat arrived and offered a tow. ``The cable they used to tow us was very short, about 15 meters (49 feet) long,'' said Ponce. He and Rodolfo Lucano, another commercial captain, said the cable should have been at least 165 feet long. The vessel listed sharply twice, to port then starboard, ``but they did not reduce speed. They must have seen that we were listing dangerously,'' said Ponce. He said passengers were panicked by the second steep tilt. The vessel flipped over, trapping passengers below. Rogelio Franzua, an 18-year-old high school student who had been headed home to Puerto Barrios, also estimated the length of the towing cable at 45 feet. He, like Ponce, said no life jackets were aboard the Rufino Barrios. ``Both the ferry and the navy have responsibility. Because the ferry was overloaded and without needed equipment. And the patrol boat should have taken off at least some of us before beginning to tow, and they towed us too fast,'' Franzua said. 
KGB chief Vladimir Kryuchkov held a highly unusual meeting with U.S. Ambassador Jack Matlock at Matlock's request, the official Soviet news agency Tass reported today. Tass gave no indication of what was discussed in their ``detailed conversation'' Tuesday. U.S. Embassy officials, who customarily refuse to disclose the content of diplomatic conversations, could not immediately be reached for comment. It was Matlock's first reported meeting with the head of Soviet state security since he took up the duties of U.S. ambassador in April 1987. Kryuchkov was named to succeed Viktor M. Chebrikov as KGB chief as the result of a high-level Kremlin shakeup last fall. 
Japanese companies captured half the world's $50.2 billion semiconductor market last year while the market share of U.S. companies declined, according to a survey released today. The American share fell from 39 percent in 1987 to 37 percent in 1988 while the Japanese share rose about the same amount, from about 48 percent to 50 percent, according to the annual industry survey by Dataquest, a market research and consulting firm. ``American companies are not taking advantage of high-growth areas to the same extent,'' said Stan Bruederle, vice president for Dataquest's components division research. Japanese companies' emphasis on the industry's fastest-growing segments such as high performance microprocessors and, particularly, dynamic random access memory, or DRAMs, was responsible for the 2 percent change in both region's market share, Bruederle said. The San Jose-based company, which surveyed 112 top semiconductor suppliers, also reported that worldwide growth in the industry slowed in the final three months of 1988. Global semiconductor sales in 1988 reached $50.2 billion, up 32.9 percent from 1987's $38.1 billion market. That increase was greater than the industry's 22.8 percent growth in 1987 but less than Dataquest's growth forecast of 35.8 percent. ``If you look at total worldwide revenues, this is typical of what occurs at this stage of the business cycle,'' Bruederle said. The semiconductor industry enjoyed its greatest growth in the decade in 1984, when sales jumped 48 percent, he said. Dataquest said that Japanese companies' dominance in DRAMS, the high-density, low-cost memories widely used in personal computers, helped boost their share of the American semiconductor market to a record 20 percent last year, up from 15 percent in 1987. But American companies also gained in the Japanese market, capturing 10 percent of sales in 1988, an increase of nearly 2 percent from 1987. It was the first time U.S. companies improved their share of the Japanese market since 1984, Dataquest said. Japanese semiconductor companies, however, have a built-in advantage of being the primary suppliers of the Japanese market, the fastest-growing market in the world, Bruederle said. Japanese companies enjoy 89 percent of their domestic market. European companies' sales dropped to 10 percent last year from 11 percent in 1987, but companies in other parts of the world enjoyed a greater market share, 3 percent in 1988 compared with 1.6 percent the year before, Dataquest said. 
The arrival of a record 242,000 immigrants from Eastern Europe _ more than half from Poland _ has strained West Germans' hospitality and ability to integrate so many newcomers. The Bavarian culture ministry, meanwhile, announced Tuesday that a Russian-language school will open next fall in Pfarrkirchen to help assimilate refugee children from the Soviet Union. Those making up the largest group of immigrants in 1988 _ 140,226 _ came from Poland, followed by 47,572 Soviets of German descent and 39,832 people from East Germany. The increase over the previous record of 90,000 in 1987 reflects a relaxation of emigration policy in the three Soviet bloc countries. Even more refugees are expected this year, said Horst Waffenschmidt, the Interior Ministry official responsible for refugees. Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's reform efforts have eased restrictions on those seeking to leave the country, and the more tolerant view has been adopted to some degree by authorities in Warsaw and East Berlin. Politicians and labor union officials concerned about West Germany's 8 percent jobless rate have been increasingly critical of the government's policy of accepting virtually all ethnic Germans seeking to emigrate to the West. Many of the newcomers speak little or no German and are already near retirement age or have limited job skills. The East European refugees usually require government-financed housing, food, language training and other social services for months after their arrival. Saarland state governor Oskar Lafontaine of the left-wing Social Democratic Party complained in October that the ethnic Germans were getting priority over people from Third World countries seeking political asylum. Waffenschmidt, an influential member of Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democrat Party, said the Bonn government is committed to doing all it can ``to ease for these countrymen their new start in our land.'' He said $1.1 billion has been earmarked for aiding East European refugees in 1989. Christian Democratic spokesman Johannes Gester on Tuesday urged the government to create a fourth reception camp for Soviet bloc immigrants to ease crowding at the three facilities currently registering arrivals and provide initial assistance for them. Thousands of immigrants are camped in crowded barracks and tent cities throughout the federal republic. Local governments struggle with short funds and a tight housing market to provide suitable dwellings. Emigration to West Germany from Romania fell by about 1,000 last year to 12,902, according to the Interior Ministry figures. There were 959 resettlers from Czechoslovakia, 763 from Hungary and 223 from Yugoslavia, the government reported. 
The influential communist party weekly Polityka has published a full-page interview with Lech Walesa, chairman of the banned Solidarity union movement, the state-run PAP news agency reported today. The edition, due in newspaper kiosks Thursday, carries the interview under the headline ``Agreement Is Necessary In This Country,'' PAP said. The appearance of the interview in Polityka, which is used to convey official party positions, is a further sign authorities have accepted Walesa as a partner for discussions and are reconsidering their 1982 ban on Solidarity. The publication comes a day after government spokesman Jerzy Urban made clear that authorities are ready to begin talks on the chief opposition demand, reinstating Solidarity, which was suppressed in a December 1981 military crackdown. In a brief portion of the interview quoted by PAP, Walesa reiterated that, ``Legalization of Solidarity is the key issue.'' The excerpt continued, ``I repeat: We do not want to overthrow the authorities. A compromise is in our common interest ... The interest of Poland is the order of the day. This is the supreme cause. That's why we must come to terms with each other.'' Government spokesmen have said the Communist Party's governing central committee could meet as early as next week to resconsider the issue of Solidarity. However, some opposition spokesmen have cautioned against excessive optimism about the developments. If the party indicates it will reinstate Solidarity, Walesa has said he would enter talks with Communist authorities on restoring the union movement and dealing with trying to revive Poland's limping economy. 
Joel Steinberg's attorney says he doesn't expect his client will be acquitted in his trial in which he is accused of fatally beat his illegally adopted 6-year-old daughter. ``I think the best we can get is criminally negligent homicide,'' lead defense attorney Ira London said in an interview in today's New York Newsday. ``I know Joel won't like that because he wants nothing short of acquittal, but I don't think it's realistic,'' London said Tuesday. ``He'll probably do jail time.'' Also Tuesday, Judge Harold Rothwax ruled that Steinberg must undergo an examination by a psychiatrist selected by prosecutors because Steinberg's lawyers seemed to be presenting an insanity defense without formally declaring so. Steinberg, 47, is accused of second-degree murder in the November 1987 beating death of Lisa Steinberg. Steinberg must decide whether to argue that he is not criminally responsible by reason of mental disease or defect. If a defendant makes such a claim, the prosecution can examine him. London said he probably will not argue insanity and probably will refuse to allow prosecution psychiatrists to examine Steinberg. He said the judge misunderstood the defense position. ``I don't think we're going to argue mental disease or defect,'' London said, ``but the problem is the judge interprets what we're going to argue as mental disease or defect.'' London said he will not argue that Steinberg was insane. ``I don't think he was crazy. I think what happened here is that he did not have a perception of what Lisa was suffering,'' he said. He said Steinberg got bad information or no information from his then-live-in lover, Hedda Nussbaum, about the child's condition. Rothwax told prosecutors to have the petition for him to sign Thursday. He left it to both sides to work out an examination schedule. If the defense doesn't invoke an insanity defense, the prosecution psychiatrist won't be called, the judge said. If the defense clearly does present an insanity defense, then the prosecution will be prepared to rebut the testimony, he said. Last month, Rothwax turned down a defense request to present an insanity defense, saying they had to present psychiatric evidence to support the request. The defense then abandoned that approach. London said such a move would have required the defendant to give up his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination and would permit the psychiatrist to testify about any unproven comment he had heard about Steinberg. Assistant District Attorneys Peter Casolaro and John McCusker charged last week that Steinberg's lawyers were presenting an insanity defense by using the testimony of lay witnesses. In the Newsday interview, London said he took the case because it was a challenge. ``I have three daughters of my own and they were very upset when I decided to take this case,'' London said. ``Steinberg approached me. I never thought it was going to be as intense as it was, though. But of course there was also a nice fee involved.'' London declined to reveal the amount, but Newsday quoted an unidentified court source as saying it was around $500,000. At the time of his arrest, Steinberg reportedly had $2 million in assets, half of which was later taken by the Internal Revenue Service in back taxes, the newspaper said. ``But after awhile, even my family came to understand this was about more than a large fee,'' London said. ``They understand now that if Joel Steinberg can get a fair trial in this country, anyone can. Joel Steinberg deserves his day in court like everyone else.'' 
Winds gusting to 60 mph today blew down trees, caused power outages and triggered gale warnings from Maine to South Carolina as snow fell over the Appalachian Mountains and the eastern Great Lakes. The fast-moving snowstorm Tuesday night left about 5 inches of snow in Chadron and Strongsville, Ohio, 4 inches in Pittsburgh and Cleveland and an inch in Washington, Baltimore and Philadelphia The storm was tapering off along the East Coast, but snow advisories remained in effect in New York, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Delaware and Maryland, as well as in West Virginia and Indiana. A heavy snow warning was posted in Ohio. Scattered rain showers and a few thunderstorms fell over Arizona and Southern California, and the Pacific Northwest got some rain showers. Dense fog was reported in Idaho, Utah and central California. Skies were clear from Florida to the Gulf Coast states, the central Plains and the upper Mississppi Valley and in most of the Northwest. The highest winds on the East Coast were reported in North Carolina, where 60 mph gusts were recorded in Jacksonville. Trees were blown down and power outages were reported across North Carolina and portions of Georgia. Storm warnings were up for waters off the North Carolina coast. In Vermont, strong winds and subzero temperatures were expected to produce wind chill factors of 30 to 40 degrees below zero. The nation's high Tuesday was 88 degrees at Kingsville and McAllen, Texas. Today's forecast called for snow showers over the eastern Great Lakes and central Appalachians; showers and thunderstorms from southwest Texas to parts of New Mexico, southern Arizona and Southern California; scattered rain and snow showers over northern Arizona and southern Utah; and rain showers over the Pacific Northwest. High temperatures were expected to be near zero and in the single digits in far northern New England and northeast New York; the teens and 20s across the rest of New England, northern portions of the mid-Atlantic Coast states, the central Appalachians, the upper Ohio Valley, the Great Lakes and Minnesota; the 50s and 60s in the Gulf Coast states, the central and southern Plains and the Southwest; and 70s in Texas and southern Florida. Temperatures around the nation at 2 a.m. EST ranged from 14 degrees below zero at International Falls, Minn., to 73 degrees at St. Petersburg, Fla. Other reports: _East: Atlanta 40 fair; Boston 21 windy; Buffalo 11 snow; Charleston, S.C. 49 windy; Cincinnati 26 fair; Cleveland 25 snow; Detroit 20 cloudy; Miami 67 fair; New York 26 snow; Philadelphia 29 snow; Pittsburgh 24 snow; Portland, Maine 11 fair; Washington 31 snow. _Central: Bismarck 20 fair; Chicago 30 fair; Dallas-Fort Worth 44 partly cloudy; Denver 31 fair; Des Moines 20 partly cloudy; Indianapolis 22 fair; Kansas City 26 fair; Minneapolis-St. Paul fair; Nashville 34 fair; New Orleans 55 fair; St. Louis 31 fair. _West: Albuquerque 37 cloudy; Anchorage foggy; Las Vegas 49 showery; Los Angeles 55 partly cloudy; Phoenix 58 partly cloudy; Salt Lake City 21 foggy; San Diego 54 cloudy; San Francisco 42 fair; Seattle 45 cloudy. _Canada: Montreal fair; Toronto fair. 
The dollar rose in active European trading this morning, spurred by heavy commercial buying. Dealers said the dollar's strength pushed gold prices slightly lower. ``Plenty of people seem to want to buy the dollar right now,'' said a dealer with a Milan commercial bank who, like several others, expressed surprise at the U.S. currency's strength. ``It seems there's no end to dollar bids,'' said a dealer at a major West German bank in Frankfurt. Dealers in Frankfurt said steady demand for dollars was coming from commercial institutions in Asia, where banks in Japan opened their trading rooms for the first time this year. Another Milan trader said the market was expecting Friday's release of U.S. unemployment figures for December to show a fall to 5.3 percent from 5.4 percent in November. That, the dealers said, could strengthen the dollar on expectations that the U.S. Federal Reserve will raise interest rates in order to prevent the economy from overheating. In Tokyo, where trading ends before Europe's business day begins, the dollar fell sharply against the yen compared with last Friday's Tokyo close. But it was up from Tuesday's late rate in Europe. The dollar finished in Tokyo at 124.05 yen, down from last Friday's 125.90 yen but higher than 123.50 yen in Europe on Tuesday. In London late this morning, it was quoted at 124.50 yen. Other dollar rates at mid-morning, compared with late Tuesday: _1.7770 West German marks, up from 1.7620 _1.5085 Swiss francs, up from 1.4912 _6.0680 French francs, up from 6.0125 _2.00205 Dutch guilders, up from 1.9870 _1,306.50 Italian lire, up from 1,295.75 _1.1955 Canadian dollars, up from 1.1900 In London, the British pound fell to $1.8165, compared with $1.8270 late Tuesday. Gold opened in London at a bid price of $410.50 a troy ounce, down from late Tuesday's $411.75. It was unchanged at midmorning when the city's five major bullion dealers fixed the recommended price. In Zurich, the bid price was $408.80, down from $411.25 bid late Tuesday. Earlier, in Hong Kong, gold fell $1.95 to close at a bid $412.16. Silver was quoted in London today at a bid price of $6.00 a troy ounce, down from Tuesday's $6.07. 
Chinese students in a central city beat a Sri Lankan student, threw rocks at Africans and put up anti-black posters as racial tensions spread to a fourth Chinese city, foreigners said today. The violence occurred Saturday at the Central China Polytechnical College in Wuhan, 680 miles south of Beijing, said a student from Gabon and an American teacher. In Beijing, meanwhile, African students boycotted classes at the Beijing Languages Institute today, one day after Chinese demonstrated against an alleged attack by a black student on a Chinese woman. ``Brothers, let us unite and fight for dignity,'' said a leaflet distributed by Africans at the institute. ``Black is beauty.'' In Wuhan, Chinese students put up posters saying ``Black devil, go home'' on the walls of the foreign dormitory at the college, according to a student from Gabon. He also quoted a Sri Lankan student as saying he had been attacked and beaten by Chinese. The Gabonese said he did not think the Sri Lankan had been seriously injured. About 300 Chinese students also roamed the campus on Saturday, throwing rocks at the African students' dormitory, said the Gabonese, who was at the college visiting friends when the attack occurred. School authorities responded Sunday by suddenly taking the college's 12 African students on a trip to the interior of Hubei province, where Wuhan is located, said the Gabonese, a student from Hubei Medical College. As of today, he said the students had yet to return. Other schools responded by canceling African parties and urging dark-skinned students not to leave campus, said the Gabonese and an American teacher. The incident in Wuhan began Tuesday when Chinese students from the polytechnical institute wrote a letter to the school's director saying they didn't want Africans in their university because African were ``polluting Chinese society with their relations with Chinese women,'' the student said. He said he learned about the contents of the letter from a Chinese official at the college who is responsible for the Africans. The letter also expressed support for anti-black demonstrations occurring simultaneously in Nanking, several hundred miles to the east. Last week, thousands of Chinese youths demonstrated in Nanking following a clash between African students and Chinese at Hehai University over Chinese women. Chinese authorities say the brawl occurred when two African students hit a gatekeeper who refused to allow two Chinese women to attend an African Christmas Eve party. Official Chinese news reports have said 11 Africans and two Chinese were injured. During the demonstrations, Chinese youths yelled racist slogans and called for the Africans to be punished. Chinese authorities later arrested one African student, from Ghana, and detained three others for questioning in a move apparently aimed at quelling the demonstrators' wrath. On Tuesday, Su Xiaoxun, an official in Nanking, denied allegations made by African students and diplomats that Chinese forces on Saturday attacked and tortured Africans at a guest house about 50 miles outside Nanking. African students and a diplomat from Benin claimed Chinese troops had applied electic shocks to African students' faces, backs and genitals. The 140 mostly African students had been forced to the guest house on Dec. 26 following the African-Chinese clash and the protests. In Beijing, about 500 African students at the Beijing Languages Institute began their class boycott today as about 2,000 Chinese ended theirs. The day before, about 200 Chinese marched for two hours, protesting the incident during which an African student allegedly followed a Chinese woman into her room at 4:30 a.m. on New Year's Day. African students said they were boycotting classes because the Chinese treat them ``like animals,'' according to the leaflet. ``If we keep silent against this discrimination we witness then we are animals and are guilty,'' the leaflet said. Relations between Chinese and Africans are tense. Chinese are often openly racist and Africans are frustrated by a culture that is very different than their own. The tensions become explosive when Chinese women are involved. Chinese students are also unhappy with the way the government and their schools are treating them and have jumped on the African issue as a pretext to vent complex feelings of discontent about their position in society. A fourth racially-related incident continued in Hangzhou, where 56 African students have been boycotting classes for a week because they allege Chinese authorities say they all have AIDS. 
At least 10 countries are reliably reported to have chemical weapons, and several have unleashed them in recent wars, Swedish researchers say. But an accurate and certain count of countries posssessing chemical weapons is clouded by disinformation and vested interests, said the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute. At one time or another, 38 countries were reported to have chemical weapons, but the reports often were unreliable or hard to assess, SIPRI said in its 1988 yearbook, which was published in August. ``It's hard to put a figure on it,'' SIPRI researcher Johan Lundin said in an interview today. ``A few countries have declared they have chemical weapons, others say they intend to have them, and there are a lot of allegations against other countries. We have no information of our own.'' SIPRI is a private research institute partially funded by the Swedish government. It was established to monitor the world arms trade and developments in disarmament, mainly through published reports. SIPRI said in the 1988 yearbook that responsible U.S. and other government officials speaking on the record listed nine countries as having chemical weapons or intending to acquire them. These were France, Iraq, North Korea, Syria, the United States, the Soviet Union, Afghanistan, Iran and Vietnam. Since the book's publication, the United States has accused Libya of having a weapons-producing capability. Libya denies it. Lundin said the U.S. allegation about Libya's capability was as reliable as those on which the previous count of nine nations was based. SIPRI said other countries have been named in less reliable reports. A purported 1983 U.S. intelligence document leaked to the British Broadcasting Corp. added the names of Burma, China, Egypt, Ethiopia, Israel, Libya and Taiwan as possessors. Last year, Iran and Iraq were reported to have used toxic gases. Combatants in Angola, Mozambique and Afghanistan also made unsubstantiated allegations that they were victims of chemical warfare, Lundin said. In 1987, Libya was accused of using lethal gas in Chad and Vietnam was charged with poisoning water supplies in Cambodia and the SIPRI yearbook said chemical weapons were used in the Iran-Iraq war. The previous year, charges of chemical war were raised against Ethiopia, Iraq, Iran, the Soviet Union, Vietnam, Angola, Chad, Libya and Nicaragua, SIPRI reported without elaborating. 
Israeli soldiers today shot and killed a Palestinian teen-ager and wounded three other youths in clashes at two refugee camps in the occupied Gaza Strip, Arab hospital officials said. The Israeli army said it was checking the reports. In the Gaza Strip refugee camp of Deir el Balah, Palestinian youths hurled stones at an army patrol, and troops opened fire, killing Nasser Ismail Nasser, 16, officials at the camp's U.N. clinic said. A 15-year-old from Deir el Balah was seriously wounded in the chest during the clash, said officials at Gaza City's Ahli Arab Hospital. In the nearby Nuseirat camp, two Palestinian teen-agers were wounded in a stone-throwing clash with troops, Ahli Arab officials said. The death brought to 346 the number of Palestinians killed since the uprising began Dec. 8, 1987 in the Gaza Strip and West Bank, territories occupied by Israel since the 1967 Middle East war. Fourteen Israelis have been killed in the Palestinian uprising. Also today, the Foreign Ministry urged members of parliament not to meet with PLO officials in Paris and the Netherlands. Members of right-wing and religious parties asked the government to prevent a delegation of four left-wing legislators from leaving the country for the Paris meeting. A Foreign Ministry official said his office has urged legislators not to attend the Jan. 12-13 European symposium on the Middle East in Paris and a meeting at The Hague in the Netherlands on Jan. 30-31. The Hadashot newspaper reported that Labor members Avraham Burg, Abba Eban and Chaim Tzadok planned to meet PLO officials in The Hague. ``We asked from a foreign policy point of view that they not attend,'' the ministry official said, adding the ministry could take no further steps in the matter. He spoke on condition of anonymity. Israeli law forbids Israelis to meet with officials of the Palestine Liberation Organization, but lawmakers have parliamentary immunity. On Tuesday, 31 right-wing and religious lawmakers asked the government to prevent four parliamentarians from leaving the country for the Paris session. ``It is forbidden to have contacts with the PLO and it doesn't matter what proposals will be made,'' Likud legislator Tzahi Hanegbi told Israel radio. He accused his four colleagues of flouting the law. Yair Tsaban, one of the four lawmakers planning to attend the Paris meeting, rejected the charge. ``We are convinced that it is our responsibility to be there and to present the voice of the other Israel,'' said Tsaban, a member of the socialist Mapam Party. The three other members of the delegation are Shulamit Aloni of the Citizens Rights Movement and Labor legislators Ora Namir and Lova Eliav. A coalition agreement signed by Labor and the Likud bloc rejects talks with the PLO, and both factions on Tuesday night reiterated their objections in a joint declaration in parliament. The United States recently opened talks with the PLO after PLO chairman Yasser Arafat recognized Israel's right to exist and said he renounced terrorism. The change in U.S. policy was sharply criticized by Israeli officials. 
Anheuser-Busch Cos. says it has suspended production at its biggest brewery because an oil slick working its way down the Mississippi River has slightly altered the taste of the water used in making beer. ``Our quality control systems are highly sensitive to changes in the content and aroma of the city drinking water used in the brewing process,'' Andrew J. Steinhubl, senior vice president of brewing, said Tuesday. ``And we acted immediately to cease production when we detected a change.'' Company officials had not detected anything that would indicate a health hazard, Steinhubl said. The company said the shutdown will last several days at most and will not affect the availability of the company's products. The shutdown forced the layoff of about 2,000 brewing and packaging production employees, Steinhubl said. About 4,000 other employees, including maintenance workers and office staff, will remain on the job, he said. The oil slick resulted from the rupture Dec. 24 of a Shell Oil Co. pipeline in central Missouri. State officials said the spill was the worst in Missouri history. Hundreds of thousands of gallons of crude oil spilled into the Gasconade River, a tributary of the Missouri River, which flows into the Mississippi above St. Louis. By Dec. 28, the oil had reached the Missouri and Mississippi river intakes of the St. Louis Water Department's plants. It now has reached as far south on the Mississippi as Cape Girardeau, 110 miles southeast of here, officials said. James Shea, St. Louis director of public utilities, stressed that the water was safe to drink but that residents might notice a slight oily taste or smell. City officials said the oil-tainted water is just now reaching customers because the city filled its reserve tanks last week in anticipation of the slick. Shell has recovered about 336,000 gallons of the oil from the rivers, and its cleanup is expected to continue at least through next week. Anheuser-Busch has 11 other breweries. The St. Louis brewery is the company's oldest and largest, producing 13 million barrels of beer a year, or 35,000 barrels a day. 
A motor launch carrying more than 140 people sank in the central Philippines, and at least 16 people were killed, the coast guard said today. Another 12 people were reported missing. Lt. Edmund Lustre, coast guard operations chief in Iloilo, said the cargo vessel Jem II sank Tuesday off Romblon Island, about 150 miles southeast of Manila. He said a coast guard rescue team sent to Romblon reported 114 people had been rescued and that 16 bodies had been recovered. Lustre said earlier the boat carried more than 170 people and that 45 were missing. He said in a telephone interview later those figures were readjusted after rescuers found ``people were being counted over and over.'' Lustre said most of the passengers were believed to have been high school students en route from Romblon to Panay after the Christmas holidays. 
A former Czechoslovak diplomat in India, Vlastimil Lubvik, has been granted political asylum in Britain, the Foreign Office said. Lubvik was first secretary at his country's embassy in New Delhi, but the Foreign Office would not say Tuesday night when he arrived in Britain or give any details on his defection. A spokesman said that Home Secretary Douglas Hurd granted the asylum request and Lubvik was in Britain. Press Association, the British domestic news agency, said Lubvik approached Sir David Goodall, the British High Commissioner (ambassador) in New Delhi, more than two weeks ago and came to Britain before Christmas. The agency said Czechoslovak authorities reported Lubvik had disappeared and suggested he had been abducted. Relations between London and Prague have been cool in recent years. In September, Britain expelled three Czechoslovak diplomats, including two military attaches, for spying. Six days later, Prague retaliated by ordering two British military attaches to leave. Britain has not yet formally responded to a Czechoslovak offer to send experts to Britain to help try to discover whether the Semtex plastic explosive they manufacture was the cause of the crash of the Pan Am Flight 103 airliner in Scotland on Dec. 21. Britain also protested to Czechoslovakia about its treatment of religious groups, claiming their human rights were being violated. 
A federal appeals court rejected as unconstitutional a school system's practice of offering non-sectarian invocations before football games. A panel of the 11th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ruled 2-1 Tuesday that the offering of prayers by laymen is still objectionable because the practice ``has a religious purpose and a primary effect of advancing religion.'' ``I'm ecstatic,'' said Douglas Jager, 20, the former Douglas County High School student who sued the 13,800-student Douglas County school system in suburban Atlanta in 1985. ``This is exactly where I wanted it to be.'' At the time, invocations were delivered by ministers. Jager, who described himself as an agnostic, said the prayers violated separation of church and state. In the meantime, the school district opened up the invocations to non-ministers. Jager and his father challenged the ``equal access'' plan as well. A federal judge threw out the original plan but said the alternative was acceptable. However, the appeals court said Tuesday, ``There is no indication that the school district will refrain from its 40-year-old practice of having clergy deliver religious invocations before high school football games.'' Jeffrey Bramlett, the Jagers' attorney, said the decision should provide guidance for other school systems that allow pre-game prayers. ``Hopefully they will see the handwriting on the wall and will recognize what they need to do to comply with the law,'' he said. School Superintendent Jim Steele said he had not seen the ruling and could not comment. 
A daughter haunted by nightmares about her mother's 1985 disappearance pried open a locked basement freezer and found the woman's battered body, prompting her father's confession to the slaying, police say. Leonard Tyburski, who told police he kept the body in the freezer for 3{ years because he loved his wife and didn't want to part with her, was charged with murder, authorities said. ``It has some indications of Edgar Allan Poe and even some Alfred Hitchcock,'' said District Judge James Garber, who arraigned Tyburski on Tuesday and ordered him held without bond in the Wayne County Jail. Garber delayed scheduling a preliminary hearing until Tyburski, 45, underwent psychiatric tests to determine whether he was competent to stand trial. Tyburski, dean of students at Detroit's Mackenzie High School, had cooperated with police investigating his wife's disappearance. Dorothy Tyburski was 37 when he reported her missing on Oct. 2, 1985. Tyburski passed a lie-detector test and hadn't been considered a suspect, police said. The case, treated as a missing person report, had been closed for two years. But disturbing dreams by one of the couple's daughters led her to suspect her mother's body was somewhere in the house, police said. Kelly Tyburski, a 20-year-old art student at Michigan State University, ``had nightmares or dreams or whatever you want to call them, that her mother was in a place where she couldn't move, either tied up or locked up,'' said police Detective Richard Pomorski of Canton Township, a middle-class community 25 miles west of Detroit. She didn't suspect her father until she remembered the freezer had been used before her mother's disappearance, and the key to it had disappeared, he said. Later, Detective Keith Lazar said, the daughter's dreams gave way to suspicions when Tyburski began making up stories about why the key was missing. On Monday, she pried the lock off the 15-cubic-foot freezer while her father was away, police said. She found blood on the lid and sides and her mother's clothed body bent over meat wrapped in butcher paper, police said. Kelly Tyburski and her 16-year-old sister, Kim, called a friend who drove them to the police station, ignoring their father as he returned home, detectives said. Police obtained a warrant and arrested Tyburski. Later, Tyburski told police he killed his wife during an argument on Sept. 28, 1985, Pomorski said. ``It appeared he felt sorry for her,'' Pomorski said. ``He kept her in the basement for 3{ years. His reason was that he loved her. He didn't want to part with her.'' Tyburski's daughters appeared with him during his arraignment but did not speak with reporters. The cause of death remained undetermined pending an autopsy, Lazar said. The couple had been married 17 years when Tyburski reported his wife missing. Police said Tyburski told them his wife had left ``with the clothes on her back'' after an argument and that she told him in late October 1985 that she planned to settle in Toledo, Ohio. Police had no reason to suspect foul play ``because people leave home all the time'' Detective Lt. Larry Stewart said. ``We did some relatively minor checking.'' Tyburski passed a lie detector test, and later told police and neighbors his wife had moved to Ohio and that she might have left because of emotional problems stemming from the death of a sister, Stewart said. 
Fighting flared in south Lebanon today after Syrian troops moved into neighborhoods on the outskirts of Beirut to separate rival Shiite Moslem factions who had battled for five days. A police spokesman said 10 combatants were wounded in the mortar duels in Iklim el-Tiffah, shattering an overnight lull. The new casualties increased the overall toll in the five-day confrontation to 29 killed and 76 wounded. The spokesman, who cannot be named in line with standing regulations, said it was not known which of the two factions _ the pro-Iranian Hezbollah or the Syrian-backed Amal _ rekindled the confrontation just north of Israel's self-designated security zone in south Lebanon. The two factions have been fighting for control of villages bordering the northwestern edge of the security zone. Amal is entrenched in the market town of Nabatiyeh and Hezbollah holds positions in the nearby villages of Jbaa, Ein Bouswar, Jarjou, Arab Saleem and Louwaizeh. In south Beirut's slums, the undeclared truce held, but officials feared it would not last in the absence of a political settlement of the power struggle that has raged for nine months. The Shiite community's Mufti, or religious judge, said in a statement: ``The only solution is to disarm the (two) militias.'' ``Their weapons have become tools for killing children and other innocent people,'' Sheik Abdul Amir Qabalan said. ``No one should be allowed to possess weapons in south Beirut except the Syrian forces.'' The Syrians, who have had 4,500 troops in south Beirut since the first round of Hezbollah-Amal fighting last year, moved into the area at night. Soldiers, wearing helmets and armed with AK-47 automatic rifles and rocket-propelled grenade launchers, quietly entered contested neighborhoods and tore down sandbag barricades the militiamen had erected when the latest battle began on New Year's Eve, the police spokesman said. He said the Syrian soldiers manned narrow buffer zones separating the combatants and Syrian officers used loudspeakers to order militiamen to ``withdraw from the streets and remove military manifestations.'' ``Several sand-bagged positions were removed before dawn. Several gunmen withdrew from the streets. But they gathered at entrances to buildings or basements,'' the police spokesman said. He described the Syrian move as ``another shot of tranquilizers. The clashes will start again ... if the Syrians do not crack down on one faction or the other.'' He said the situation in south Lebanon was ``more delicate'' because there are no Syrian regulars in that area. Many civilians were seen leaving the south Beirut slums for safer areas in the capital during the lull in fighting today. ``They (militias) still have plenty of weapons and ammunition. They will fight again,'' said Umm Mohammed, a resident of the south Beirut neighborhood of Haret Hreik. ``I'll return to south Beirut only when one of the two factions smashes the other or when the Syrians disarm both groups,'' she said at her daughter's home in west Beirut. A Syrian military source who demanded anonymity said the army ``will talk to both sides, convince them of certain measures and deploy on the ground to implement these measures. There is no decision to crack down on either side.'' In addition to their contingent in south Beirut, the Syrians have 7,500 troops in west Beirut and 25,000 soldiers in eastern and northern provinces under a 1976 peacekeeping mandate from the Arab League. 
Band leader Xavier Cugat received emergency treatment for severe lung inflammation at a clinic today, and his doctors said he responded well. Doctors at Quiron Clinic said in a statement that the 89-year-old, Spanish-born musician ``was responding favorably.'' He was admitted to the clinic's intensive care unit, spokeswoman Inmaculada Cuenca said. Cugat, who is credited with introducing tropical rhythms into American dance music, entered the clinic Tuesday night suffering from ``severe lung inflammation and high blood pressure,'' said the medical statement, which was signed by three doctors. Cugat was hospitalized Aug. 24 for heart and respiratory problems but was released after a 10-day stay. At the time, Dr. Jordi Rius identified Cugat's ailment as a ``problem in the left (heart) ventricle probably secondary to a respiratory infection.'' Before that he was hospitalized in February for lung congestion. Cugat, a U.S. citizen since the age of 12, gave up a 50-year band career in 1970 and handed over his orchestra to Tito Puente. Ten years later he returned to Spain, where he was born in the northeastern town of Gerona on Jan. 1, 1900. Cugat and his family left Spain for Cuba when he was 4. Since returning to live in Barcelona, Cugat has suffered four heart attacks and a severe stroke. Nevertheless, he has appeared on television and radio programs to give occasional interviews. 
A man who led police on a two-state chase in a stolen bus, ramming cars and injuring 15 people, was hospitalized under guard today, and transit officials said they would probably tighten security at depots. Glen A. Barhight, 35, of Croydon was arraigned in his hospital bed Tuesday on 16 charges, including aggravated assault, recklessly endangering, receiving stolen property and causing a catastrophe. The nearly hourlong chase, which began north of Philadelphia and briefly extended into New Jersey, ended when the bus slammed into a tree northwest of Philadelphia, said Lower Moreland Police Chief Frank Amabile. ``Thank God for that tree,'' said Richard Campbell, who was sleeping in a second-floor apartment above a boutique when the bus hit outside. The bus was the second belonging to the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority to be stolen in the past week. On Saturday, an unidentified person took a bus from a depot, crashed into a dozen parked cars and fled. No one was injured. SEPTA will probably speed up plans to fence in ``problem'' depots, said Howard Patton, chief of the authority's transit police. Barhight's attorney, Robert V. McGuckin, said his client was ``a rather disturbed fellow'' who claimed to hear voices and had tried suicide at least twice. A spokeswoman at Abington Memorial Hospital said Barhight was in stable condition with a graze wound to his head, abdominal injuries and cuts to an arm. A state trooper fired a shotgun at the bus during the chase, according to police. But Amabile said Barhight wasn't hit. Besides Barhight, those injured were a police officer hit by the bus at a police roadblock midway through the chase, and 14 occupants of cars struck by the bus. The officer and six of the others were hospitalized. None was seriously hurt. ``It was like something from a horror movie,'' said Mary Beach, who happened on more than half a dozen wrecked cars on her way to work. People were walking around dazed, and others lay on the pavement, she said. 
The University of Connecticut's fleet is short one remote-controlled submarine. The submarine, insured for $71,100, sank in 378 feet of water on Dec. 9 off the island of Molokai in Hawaii when its control cable snapped, officials said. The submarine, measuring about 2 feet by 3 feet by 2 feet, is ``essentially a camera with some motors on it,'' Peter J. Auster of UConn's National Undersea Research Center said today. The school said the loss should not affect research projects planned for this summer in Africa, Israel and off the East Coast. UConn had two submarines; the lost vessel was the school's backup, Auster said. In addition, the university expects deliverty next month of another submarine, and has only one submarine pilot anyway, he said. The submarine was tethered to a surface ship when its cable became snagged, Auster said. He said the ship's crew tried to free the cable, but it broke. Auster said a University of Hawaii crew will probably attempt to recover the vessel next month. The vehicle was on loan to the University of Hawaii, which, along with UConn, is among five U.S. schools with undersea research centers supported by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Auster said. 
The United Stated currently has the following forces in the Mediterranean, according to the U.S. Navy 6th Fleet office in Gaeta: Battle Group Kennedy: Aircraft carrier John F. Kennedy 2 cruisers 2 destroyers 5 frigates Several support ships (oilers, ammunition ships, etc) In addition to the Kennedy group, there is a 2,000-person Marine amphibious group, transported on five other ships. Expected to arrive in the Mediterranean in the next week is the Battle Group Theodore Roosevelt. It includes a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier, two cruisers, two destroyers, five frigates and support ships. It is also accompanied by a five-ship amphibious ready group. 
A tentative $97 million settlement reached with Malibu residents whose expensive homes were damaged in a 1983 landslide may halt what was expected to be one of the longest trials ever. The settlement from the county, the state and insurance companies was offered Tuesday to about 250 homeowners who blamed the landslide on a decision to cut into a hillside to build a highway. The homeowners will receive an average of about $200,000 if the offer is approved, said Kenneth Chiate, one of the homeowners and an attorney in the case. The rest of the settlement goes toward lawyers' fees. ``The vast majority of the homeowners wanted out,'' he said. ``It's been a long five years. No matter how much money we got, there's no way it could pay for the damage some of them suffered.'' The trial, which was due to start next month, was expected to last two to five years and run up nearly $100 million in legal fees. Not all the homeowners were happy with the settlement offer. Actor Pernell Roberts complained that it fails to punish the parties responsible for the landslide. ``We will never have an opportunity to get at the real heart of the crime,'' he said. ``This was a tragic situation where many people will never come close to being fully compensated for their loss and the people responsible for what happened will continue to make bad judgments involving innocent people.'' The homeowners claimed the slide caused $200 million in damage. Thirty homes were condemned. Many have moved several feet toward the ocean since the slide and owners have been unable to sell, said attorney Richard Norton, who represented some of the homeowners. Under the proposal, the county will pay $35 million. Homeowners charged that the county helped cause the landslide by approving development on Big Rock Mesa. The state Department of Transportation will pay $15 million in addition to $25 million it agreed to pay earlier after being found liable for contributing to the landslide by cutting into the mesa to build Pacific Coast Highway. The homeowners' insurance companies will pay $22 million under the proposal. However, some of those companies have not agreed to that amount, Chiate said. The cases of 16 families not represented by Chiate or Norton remain unresolved. Under terms of the settlement, the property owners would drop future claims and the county would be absolved of responsibility. 
A senior Soviet diplomat said today that unless the fighting stops in Afghanistan, the estimated 50,000 Red Army soldiers who remain there could stay beyond the Feb. 15 withdrawal deadline. ``If a cease-fire holds and there is no fighting in Afghanistan, then that's a very good situation for Soviet forces to leave,'' Deputy Foreign Minister Yuli Vorontsov told reporters as he arrived in Islamabad. Afghan insurgents headquartered in Pakistan have refused to accept a cease-fire until the current Moscow-backed government in Kabul steps down. Asked whether Soviet troops could overstay the deadline, Vorontsov said, ``We shall see. ... I don't know.'' Vorontsov, who is also ambassador to Afghanistan, is searching for a political consensus that will enable the Soviets to get all their troops out on schedule and without being attacked along the way. Shortly after arriving, Vorontsov met privately with Pakistan's foreign minister, Sahabzada Yaqub Khan. The Soviet official refused to discuss the substance of the talks but as he left the meeting he told The Associated Press ``the talks were very interesting and very useful.'' When he was asked to elaborate he said, ``We talked about Soviet-Pakistan relations and Afghanistan.'' Pakistan's foreign secretary, Humayun Khan, told The AP following the meeting that ``both sides are trying to work toward a political solution.'' Pakistan, along with the United States, has strongly supported the Afghan insurgents, who began fighting after an April 1978 communist coup. About 100,000 Soviet troops intervened in Afghanistan in December 1979 to replace one pro-Moscow regime with another. Under U.N.-mediated accords, half the troops had left by Aug. 15. The balance are to be out by Feb. 15. The Soviets, who say more than 13,300 of their soldiers have been killed in the war, have already begun withdrawing troops from the western Afghan cities of Shindand and Herat, Western diplomats said Tuesday. They also said Soviet civilian advisers are leaving Kabul en masse and quoted Afghan officials as saying the main Red Army exodus will begin Jan. 15. Vorontsov said today that no further talks have been scheduled with leaders of the Pakistan-based guerrilla alliance, with whom he met in Saudi Arabia last month in the Kremlin's first official recognition of the insurgents. The guerrilla alliance's chairman, Sibghatullah Mojaddidi, told a news conference Tuesday that he expected to meet Vorontsov on Friday, but guerrilla sources say some alliance members want no more meetings with the Soviets. The Saudi Arabia meeting was tacit acknowledgment from Moscow that it is exploring a non-communist alternative to President Najib, head of the embattled Kabul government. Nevertheless, Vorontsov today refused to write off Moscow's allies in Kabul as participants in a future Afghan government. The ruling Marxists ``will survive by all means,'' he said. ``But they are willing to participate in the creation of a broad-based government.'' The seven Pakistan-based guerrilla groups in the alliance, while divided on most things, agree the Najib regime can play no part in a post-war Afghanistan. Insurgents' claims that the Kabul government will collapse without Soviet help is ``a big mistake,'' said Vorontsov. ``That's wishful thinking.'' Mojaddidi on Tuesday announced a last-minute attempt to form a transitional government and said a 400-member consultative council would convene within three weeks. Half its members would be drawn from guerrilla commanders fighting Soviet and Afghan government troops, the rest would include well-known intellectuals, tribal leaders and ``good Moslems.'' But it will be difficult to select and convene such a council, and the resistance movement has scant time to maneuver. Vorontsov was in Tehran on Tuesday meeting Iranian-based leaders of Shiite Moslem Afghan guerrillas, who operate separately from and have occasionally been at odds with the seven Sunni Moslem groups based in the Pakistani border city of Peshawar that comprise the main guerrilla alliance. At least 5.5 million Afghans have fled their country during a decade of civil war, most to Pakistan. The insurgents use border cities and refugee camps as bases and supply points for operations inside Afghanistan. 
The founder of a controversial religious camp for children says he'll disband the group because he can't pay the bills, but he still supports followers charged with beating his 8-year-old daughter to death. Insisting ``I am not a cult leader,'' Eldridge Broussard Jr. said Tuesday his Ecclesia Athletic Association was running out of money. The house in Clackamas where Broussard and his remaining 20 followers are living is up for sale, and he said the electricity was being turned off at the group's Watts Christian Center in Los Angeles. Phones at the Los Angeles facility also have been disconnected. Broussard said his organization had been receiving from $8,000 to $10,000 a month in donations, primarily from five to seven contributors, when he moved from Los Angeles to northwest Oregon in 1987 with more than 70 adults and children. Now, he said, ``we can't pay the bills. ... We're being shut down from all sides.'' Broussard, who formed Ecclesia in 1975 to steer inner city youth away from drugs and crime, said he didn't know where he would go, but he planned to stay in Oregon and support the four followers charged in the Oct. 14, 1988, death of his daughter, Dayna Lorea Broussard. The four are awaiting trial on manslaughter charges. ``I don't believe that they beat our baby to death,'' Broussard said. The former Pacific University basketball star has said his group used strict discipline and rigorous training to groom Ecclesia children for international athletic competition. The day after Broussard's daughter died, 53 children staying in the group's nearby farmhouse were taken into protective custody by the Oregon Children's Services Division. Juvenile authorities maintained the youngsters had been subjected to ritualistic beatings of up to 800 strokes and that some had been forced to watch and keep count as the Broussard's daughter was beaten. Broussard, usually known for his wild gestures and fiery speeches, sat in a rocking chair with his feet wrapped in a quilt during the news conference and at one point came close to tears. He said he had told the Ecclesia children ``their daddy was going away for a while,'' and that he was asking his remaining 20 followers to ``distance themselves from me.'' 
One of California's biggest health maintenance organizations says it will no longer serve about 11,000 poor people in the San Francisco Bay area, in part because of the toll taken by crack. Maxicare Executive Director Henry Loubet on Tuesday cited the high cost of treating infants whose mothers were addicted to the cocaine derivative. The company lost $1.5 million in 1988 on its contract with the state, which paid Maxicare $10 million to provide health services to low-income residents in San Francisco, Alameda and Contra Costa counties. ``In about 30 percent of the deliveries in the East Bay, there was some relationship'' to cocaine, said Loubet. He said that while a normal delivery costs about $3,000, a baby affected by cocaine can cost as much as $150,000. The cutoff is service takes effect at the end of the month and means a clinic in San Francisco and another in Oakland will close on Jan. 31. Maxicare will lay off about 75 doctors and other employees at the clinics. The company will continue to serve 50,000 members in the Bay area and Sacramento, said Loubet. 
A senior aide to PLO chairman Yasser Arafat today accused the Mossad, Israel's secret service, of bombing Pan Am Flight 103 to counter growing international sympathy for the Palestinian cause. However, Salah Khalaf admitted the PLO did not have concrete evidence linking the disaster to Israel. Khalaf, co-founder of Arafat's Fatah, the mainstream Palestine Liberation Organization faction, also renewed a PLO offer to help Washington's probe into the bombing that killed 270 people on Dec. 21. The Boeing 747, with 259 people on board, crashed into the town of Lockerbie, Scotland. All on board and 11 people on the ground died. ``We charge Mossad of carrying out the operation,'' Khalaf said at a news conference. ``The sole party to benefit from this incident at this time in particular is Israel because it is seeking to undercut the prominence that the Palestinian issue has gained internationally.'' The inquiry into the bombing has focused in part on Palestinian extremists opposed to Arafat's recent peace overtures, which include recognition of Israel, and on Iranian-linked Moslem fundamentalists. Among those mentioned as possibly being involved is Ahmed Jibril, a former Syrian army captain who leads a Libyan-funded, Syria-based PLO splinter group called the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command. Jibril's group has denied involvement in the incident. ``We have expressed readiness to exchange information about this incident or any other, because we are definitely against terrorism,'' Khalaf said. ``But until now, there have been no contacts by the United States with us to translate this into action.'' An adviser to Arafat, Khaled Hassan, told the London Channel 4 Commercial Television Network on Tuesday that if the perpetrators were Palestinians and were caught, Arafat would ``put them in front of the court.'' Khalaf, commenting on that remark, said: ``We are not yet in a position to put anyone on trial...we can't even lay our hands on Ahmed Jibril.'' 
Episcopal bishops are expected to act quickly to confirm the election of the Anglican Church's first woman bishop now that standing committees around the country have provided the necessary supporting votes. The Rev. Barbara Harris, a priest in Philadelphia, passed the milestone late Tuesday when an envelope arrived at the Episcopal Diocese of Boston containing the 60th vote of support from the 118 standing committees. Harris needed the approval of a majority of the committees, or more than 59 votes. The Boston diocese named Harris suffragan, or assistant bishop, on Sept. 24. Months of debate followed, with several factions opposing the election because of her sex. James Solheim, spokesman for the diocese, said Harris had won support from roughly two out of three standing committees as of Tuesday. The vote was ``the only serious obstacle to her consecration,'' he said. ``The expectation is that the bishops will vote quickly and affirmatively.'' The bishops' balloting will be conducted by mail, and the process is expected to begin shortly, Solheim said. One reason Harris is expected to win support of a majority of Episcopal bishops is that they themselves voted in 1976 to allow women priests and bishops. Women have been priests since then, but Harris would be the first female bishop in any branch of worldwide Anglicanism. Bishop David E. Johnson of the Boston diocese said in a statement, ``I am especially delighted for Barbara that the church has endorsed her for this new ministry, and it's an exciting way for us to move into the new year.'' Harris did not return a message left at her office at the Episcopal Church Publishing Co. in Philadelphia on Tuesday. Her home number has been changed three times because of death threats related to her election, Solheim said. Harris' mother and the Boston diocese said she was traveling to Boston. Harris, 58, is executive director of the publishing house and interim rector of the Church of the Advocate in Philadelphia. In recent months, she has declined to comment until the standing committees and the bishops confirm her election. Each standing committee consists of four lay members and four members of the clergy. 
A woman accused of forcing her two children to drink windshield wiper fluid has been sentenced to four months in jail. Judge Robert W. Tyson Jr. on Tuesday also placed Benita Wege, 36, on probation for five years on her no-contest plea to two counts of child abuse. Her children, Brent, 8, and Brigitte, 7, were hospitalized in critical condition along with their mother after drinking the fluid. All three recovered. The fluid contained methyl alcohol, which can cause blindness or death. Mrs. Wege and her husband were obtaining a divorce and had just fought Feb. 2 when she and the children checked into a Coral Springs hotel, where she gave them a mixture of wiper fluid and fruit juice, authorities said. According to police, Brent said his mother told the children, ``We're going to have a party, and if we drink the blue stuff, we'll sleep better.'' He also told police his mother threatened to ``pour it down our throats'' if the children didn't drink it. She and her husband later reconciled. Alan Wege said his wife was punished too harshly. ``She should not be taken from her children,'' he said. 
Two student journalists have been ordered reinstated at Dartmouth College by a judge who said their suspensions were tainted by bias against the off-campus, conservative weekly for which they worked. Superior Court Judge Bruce Mohl on Tuesday said he found ``no persuasive evidence'' that the students were actually punished for their association with The Darmouth Review. But he said one member of the panel that disciplined Review editors Christopher Baldwin and John Sutter harbored ``substantial bias and prejudice'' against the weekly. As a result, he ordered the Ivy League school to reinstate the two, who could be disciplined again by a reconstituted disciplinary panel. Mohl's ruling ends the first skirmish on what he described as ``a massive legal battleground'' in which the students, backed by prominent conservatives including William F. Buckley Jr. and William Simon, say that Dartmouth discriminates against conservatives. Mohl generally did not address First Amendment claims and other core issues in the students' pending state and federal lawsuits. They were suspended in March for 18 months for harassment for their role in a classroom confrontation with a black music professor, William Cole. A third Review staffer involved completed his six-month suspension; a fourth served probation. The students, who are white, denied any racial motivation, but the incident heightened racial tension on the Hanover campus, where Baldwin and other students, most of them Review staffers, were disciplined for a nighttime sledgehammer attack on anti-apartheid shanties on campus in 1986. Late Tuesday, Dartmouth had not decided how to respond to the ruling. ``Although the court has temporarily set aside the disciplinary committee's decision, we welcome the court's findings that the college has safeguarded the students' rights and that the college's discplinary procedures are fair,'' said spokesman Alex Huppe. Baldwin, 21, of Hinsdale, Ill., and Sutter, 22, of St. Louis, will return to campus late this week for the term that began Tuesday after tying up loose ends at their jobs in New York, one of their lawyers, Francis Murphy, said today. ``The students are overjoyed with the decision,'' said Murphy. ``They've missed Dartmouth greatly.'' Mohl ruled that film professor Albert LaValley's presence on the nine-member disciplinary panel ``was fundamentally unfair'' to the students. The students questioned his objectivity because four months before the classroom confrontation he signed a letter condemning the Review for ``slanderous articles'' that ``seriously threatened the principle of academic freedom.'' Mohl did not judge other issues in the case, such as whether the suspensions were supported by the evidence or were unduly harsh or discriminatory. But he dismissed claims that two other panel members were biased and that yet another member, who dropped off the panel before it began deliberating, prejudiced the outcome by participating at all. Mohl concluded by scolding all the participants in the Feb. 25 confrontation in Cole's classroom. ``It cannot help but be noted that had greater civility and less discourtesy been observed by ALL the participants in that brief encounter ... an exhaustive expenditure of human and financial assets might well have been avoided,'' Mohl wrote, underlining ``all.'' 
Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi asked Moscow to help prevent a possible U.S.-Libyan clash in the Mediterranean by sending ships to an area of planned U.S. maneuvers, the Tanjug news agency said today. The report from Tripoli, which gave no source for its information, was apparently filed shortly after the United States announced it had shot down two Libyan fighter jets over the Mediterranean. Tanjug said the news ``was neither confirmed nor denied in Libya.'' Libyan radio later reported the attack. Tanjug, the official Yugoslav news agency, did not say when Gadhafi had asked the Kremlin to intervene. ``The Libyan leader, reacting to the news about American movements in the Mediterranean, asked Moscow to send part of its Mediterranean fleet to the area of forthcoming American maneuvers to avoid direct Libyan-American clashes, which could serve as an excuse for new American and possibly Israeli attacks on vital targets in Libya,'' Tanjug said. The news agency has a correspondent in Tripoli, and his reports have often proved reliable. Tanjug did not specify which part of the Mediterranean Gadhafi had in mind or how many Soviet ships he wanted to see moved. In Naples, Italy, U.S. Navy spokesman Lt. David Morris said the Soviets routinely have a presence in the Mediterranean but that he did not have specifics on the number or type of Soviet vessels there now. Tanjug reported Libya had taken heavy military precautions following word of U.S. fleet in the Mediterranean. Gadhafi's residence in Tripoli has been turned into a ``fortress'' with new tank and anti-aircraft reinforcements, Tanjug reported. Additional anti-aircraft batteries have been placed on the roof, Tanjug said, adding that French-built anti-aircraft missiles have been mounted. The mobilization of Libya's reserve troops has reportedly been ordered and military aircraft based at airfields on the Mediterranean coast have been moved inland to points in the Sahara desert, Tanjug said. Guns have been mounted in the streets at key intersections, and Gadhafi's personal guard has taken over duties from traffic police who normally regulate the movement of vehicles, the anency said. The correspondent also said he had learned that Col. Junis Jabber, the commander of Libya's armed forces, may have lost his job in an ongoing reorganization of the country's military strength. He gave no sources for that aspect of the report. 
Israel's two largest political parties are trying to prevent disclosure of the names of major campaign contributors, a move denounced by one opposition lawmaker today as ``scandalous behavior.'' Israeli law does not require disclosure of campaign contributions, and the total amount of money raised by the parties for the 1988 campaign is not known. But as much as one-third of the money reportedly comes from the United States and other foreign countries. The controversy arose when State Comptroller Miriam Ben-Porat announced that in her 1988 report she planned to name every contributor who donated more than 50,000 shekels ($27,800) to one or more political parties. The report would cover the recent parliamentary election. In response, the right-wing Likud bloc and the left-of-center Labor Party introduced a joint bill that would give the parliament speaker sole authority to publish the comptroller's report on election financing and allow the speaker to withhold parts of it. The speaker is always a member of the largest party, and the position long has been controlled by Labor or Likud. Ms. Ben-Porat met with parliament Speaker Dov Shilansky of Likud this week to express reservations about the proposed law, the Jerusalem Post said. Shlomit Lavy, a spokeswoman for the comptroller's office, refused to comment on the report. Spokesmen for Labor and Likud, who recently formed a new coalition government, did not return telephone messages at their offices. Parliament member Amnon Rubinstein of the left-leaning Shinui Party today criticized the Labor-Likud proposal. ``To me, that is scandalous behavior,'' he said. ``We are talking about millions of dollars the parties have received from big business. The very fact that they want to conceal it speaks for itself.'' Rubinstein said the system opened the door to corruption. ``Somebody who gives huge sums expects the party to give him preferential treatment,'' he said in a telephone interview. ``The fat cats abroad often give huge sums to both of the big parties and then they make sure they get their outlay back in investments, concessions and other financial privileges,'' Rubinstein told the Jerusalem Post. At the time of the 1988 campaign, Israeli media reports said Swiss businessman Bruce Rappoport donated $1.5 million to Labor, and U.S. millionaire Meshulam Riklis gave $1 million to Likud. Labor leader Shimon Peres raised $2 million during a nine-day trip to the United States in 1988, and Likud legislator Binyamin Netanyahu gained nearly $1 million for his party during a similar visits, reports said. Rubinstein said he has pushed for a 30,000-shekel ($16,700) ceiling on single contributions and a requirement that all contributions be made public, but that the proposals were killed in committee. U.S. law forbids donations from foreign nationals and limits individual contributions to $1,000 and donations of political action committees to $5,000. Public disclosure is required. 
Immigration agents looking for illegal aliens at workplaces misused search warrants and questioned anyone who looked Hispanic, even if the warrants named only one or two people, civil rights attorneys charged. As a trial over the way the Immigration and Naturalization Service conducts workplace raids opened Tuesday, civil rights attorneys argued for strict regulations on agents who go to factories and farms in search of illegal aliens. The trial is expected to last several months. U.S. District Judge Robert Aguilar is presiding. ``Witnesses will establish that there is a consistent pattern of non-specific or general warrants,'' said Suzanne Needles, spokeswoman for the Employment Law Office of the San Francisco Legal Aid Soiety. ``A warrant would name two persons, but the INS would arrive with as many as 20 agents with guns drawn and visible, approach the property at high speed, locate the two persons named, and then approach anyone who appeared to be Hispanic.'' U.S. citizens as well as undocumented aliens have been detained, she said. According to court papers, in 25 northern California raids the INS cited 32 people in search warrants but made 481 arrests. U.S. Attorney Joseph Russoniello, representing the INS, contended the agency has the right to enter a workplace with a warrant based on information that illegal aliens are there. Once inside, agents can question and arrest aliens for cause, even if those aliens are not named in the warrant, he said. ``The INS used the warrants of inspection solely for entry purposes and, after entry, independently developed the probable cause to arrest illegal aliens,'' Russoniello said in papers filed with the court. He also said the INS practices have been upheld by other courts. Although the case affects the INS only in northern and central California, lawyers in the case said it could be influential elsewhere. 
President Reagan was awakened early today with the news that U.S. Navy planes, acting in ``self defense,'' had shot down two Libyan fighter jets that Pentagon officials said had turned on the American aircraft. White House spokesman Roman Ropadiuk said Reagan, vacationing at his new Bel Air home, was informed about the 5 a.m. EST incident by national security adviser Colin L. Powell. Popadiuk said Powell telephoned the president after conferring with White House Chief of Staff Kenneth N. Duberstein. The White House staff had come under fire in August 1981 after failing to awaken Reagan after a similar encounter between U.S. and Libyan jets. Reagan was awakened about an hour after today's incident, in contrast to theprevious episode, when he was not told for more than six hours. Describing the latest incident, Popadiuk said two F-14 jet fighters ``were conducting routine defensive patrols from the USS John F. Kennedy in the Mediterranean.'' ``The Libyan aircraft approached the U.S. aircraft in a hostile manner over international waters and the U.S. aircraft, acting in self-defense, fired air-to-air missiles, downing both of the Libyan aircraft,'' said Popadiuk. There were no reported U.S. injuries. A Pentagon spokesman said the American planes were not in the Mediterranean because of increased tension between Libya and the United States over a plant U.S. officials claim Libya is using to produce chemical weapons. That spokesman, Lt. Col. Rick Oborn, said the F-14s fired after they were approached at high speed by the Soviet-built MiG-23s ``in the middle of the Mediterranean.'' Other Pentagon sources said the Libyan pilots turned on the F-14s and activated their targeting radar. U.S. officials have said they have proof Libya has started producing small amounts of chemical weapons, but they are still debating whether to try to stop it by force or by international diplomatic pressure. The Reagan administration has sought to deter Libya from producing the lethal arms and to stop other countries from providing the Libyans with expertise and equipment. Rep. Stephen Solarz, D-N.Y., today urged the administration to exhaust all diplomatic attempts before turning to a military response. ``This is a problem for us to be sure. But it's also a problem for other countries,'' Solarz said on ABC-TV's ``Good Morning America.'' ``So let's, before we act unilaterally here, first make an effort to see whether other countries are willing to join with us,'' he said. ``First diplomatically, and then, if necessary, militarily as well.'' Libya contends the facility which the United States has designated as a chemical weapons plant _ near the town of Rabta about 35 miles southwest of the capital Tripoli _ is only a medicine factory. Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi has offered to open the plant to international inspection, but Washington rejected the idea. Gadhafi has launched an international campaign of his own to refute the U.S. assertions, saying the United States wants an excuse to attack his country, as it did in 1986, and to kill him. The 1986 air raids, against barracks, living quarters and other installations at Tripoli and the coastal city of Benghazi, came after the Reagan administration accused Libya of having orchestrated the bombing of a West Berlin discotheque patronized by American servicemen. Several countries, including West Germany, have voiced skepticism about the latest U.S. claims. But Secretary of State George P. Shultz, heading a U.S. delegation to an international conference beginning Saturday in Paris on chemical weapons, will push the American case while ``there is still time to do something about it,'' department spokesman Charles Redman said. ``Western assistance, in terms of technology, expertise, materials, is still required if this plant is going to sustain limited production, certainly if it's going to be able to produce on a full-scale basis,'' said Redman. The New York Times in today's editions and ABC-TV on Tuesday night reported that Libya has been moving chemicals needed for the production of poison gas out of the plant in recent days, perhaps to clear away evidence before an international inspection. Both reports quoted unidentified U.S. officials. There was a spill of toxic chemicals at the plant during an operational test run last summer, the Washington Post reported in today's editions. The newspaper quoted unnamed sources as saying that few details were known about the spill. 
Two consultants made periodic $1,000 payments to a Navy official to help Hazeltine Corp. get inside information to compete for a multimillion-dollar Navy contract, court papers allege. The documents _ a warrant to search Hazeltine's offices in Greenlawn and an affidavit supporting the warrant request _ were unsealed Tuesday in U.S. District Court. According to the papers, consultant William Parkin was hired by Hazeltine in 1986 to help the company win a $15.9 million Navy contract, called UPM-150, to build a battlefield air-traffic control system. Parkin split his $1,000-a-month payment from Hazeltine with another consultant, Fred Lackner, who contacted Stuart Berlin, a Navy procurement specialist with the Naval Air Systems Command. Every few months the consultants gave $1,000 to Berlin, the government documents said. ``Berlin apparently played a significant role in the development of the UPM-150 RFP (request for proposal) and provided inside information to Lackner for Hazeltine's use,'' the papers said. ``Lackner once told Parkin that the information Berlin provided was information that the company could not obtain on its own.'' The affidavit was based in part on conversations recorded from Parkin's phone. The court papers were unsealed because prosecutors looking into fraud and bribery in the procurement of Pentagon contracts said the investigation phase of their case was complete and the affidavits no longer needed to be secret. The search warrant was executed in June. Gerard Treanor, Parkin's lawyer, said, ``Our position is that the government can try the case outside the courtroom, but Parkin is going to be found innocent before a jury.'' In Alexandria, Va., additional court documents were released late Tuesday. Others are under seal in St. Louis, Minneapolis and Los Angeles. Among the Alexandria documents was a search warrant of Parkin's house in which investigators said the consultant may have been engaged in criminal activity before he retired from the Pentagon in 1983. Telephone intercepts and recorded conversations ``indicated that Parkin's business has been criminal prior to beginning his consulting business. He has said that he was helping other consultants make money while working'' at the Pentagon ``by providing them with information,'' the document said. Parkin ``also mentioned working for companies directly while in government,'' it said. A grand jury in Alexandria is expected to hand up indictments in the case soon, possibly as early as this week. Parkin, a known target of the Pentagon procurement probe, had been employed by the Navy's Joint Cruise Missile Project Office from 1977 to 1983. Hazeltine, a subsidiary of the St. Louis-based Emerson Electric, makes electronics communications in its Greenlawn plant. Lt. Brian Cullin, a Navy spokesman, said Hazeltine and another contractor, Gould Inc., had been the final two competitors for the UPM-150 contract, which he said has not yet been awarded. Berlin has been transferred to a non-contracting position in the Navy, Cullin said. The papers also briefly mentioned two other military contracts involving Hazeltine and another consultant, Thomas Muldoon. Muldoon had been hired by Hazeltine in 1987 in connection with a Marine Corps digital wide-band transmission system contract called MRC 139, the affidavit said. It was alleged that Muldoon had discussed various bids for the initial $1 million phase of the project with yet another consultant, Mark Saunders. Investigators said in the papers that Saunders received the bid information from George Stone, a Navy employee who previously was director of the office of management ervices in the contracts division of the Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command. Stone has been suspended without pay from the Navy, Cullin said. The third contract involved the Navy's Secure Tranceiver and Ancillaric Equipments program. The affidavit alleged that Parkin and Muldoon discussed bids made for that project prior to their being made public. Cullin said that Hazeltine is one of several contractors placed on a certification list, which requires companies to certify in writing that they have not done anything improper in obtaining advance information about a contract. He said the Navy may impose harsher restrictions on Hazeltine. 
With the crack of gavels and the tinkling of ice against party glasses, Congress is back, celebrating the bicentennial of its first session in 1789 and looking to the future. Back, with members talking about what to do about the budget deficit and under what circumstances to accept a pay raise or whether or not the military base-closing list submitted by an independent commission should be accepted as is. Back, with the majority Democrats extending what amounts to an olive branch to the Republican White House soon to be run by George Herbert Walker Bush. Back, with Bush swearing in 31 newly elected and re-elected senators and one man appointed to the job. Back, with new senators and House members holding party after party to celebrate election successes. Back, with one prominent exception. Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass., due to be sworn in for the sixth time, chose instead to be in Providence, R.I., to see his son, Patrick, sworn in as a member of the state Legislature. ``That's something that as a proud father he could not miss,'' said Melody Miller, a Kennedy staff member. In the Old Senate Chamber, used by that body from 1810 to 1859, President-elect Bush administered at least one oath that wasn't on the schedule. Bush, soon to be the nation's 41st president, turned to the photographers surrounding him and asked them to raise their right hands and to swear an oath _ an oath of good conduct and flattering photographs _ during his administration. The moment came in a banter-filled pause during the ceremonial reenactment of the oath of office for senators. On the Senate floor, Sen. Phil Gramm, R-Texas, switched desks with newly elected Sen. Connie Mack, R-Fla., giving Mack a desk once held by a family member, a senator from Texas. Sen. Christopher Dodd, D-Conn., led newly elected Sen. Joe Lieberman, D-Conn., down the aisle and seated him behind the desk occupied by Dodd's father, the late Sen. Tom Dodd, D-Conn. The senior Sen. Dodd held the seat from 1958 until he was defeated in 1970 by former Sen. Lowell Weicker, R-Conn. Lieberman ended Weicker's three-term Senate career on Nov. 8. It's the 101st two-year Congress, the bicentennial Congress, 200 years since the first Congress convened in New York City in 1789. Rep. Bob Michel, R-Ill., remembered the description of the first, 1789 House of Representatives offered by Rep. Fisher Ames of Massachusetts: ``The House is composed of sober, solid folks. There are few geniuses; there are many who have experience, the virtues of the heart and the habits of business.'' Not much has changed, Michel said. ``Perhaps we are not the shining geniuses some others in this town think they are,'' Michel said. ``But our members continue to be solid and hardworking, and we still bring to this House from our home towns the virtues of the heart.'' The day saw Rep. Jim Wright, D-Texas, re-elected as Speaker of the Democratic-controlled House. Wright defeated Michel on a partisan tally, 253-170. Michel said he is ``the first man in our history to suffer the indignity of losing this contest for speaker five times in a row.'' Scores of members' small children dressed in their starched-and-pressed finest were on hand as the House opened its session precisely at noon. But soon some were squirming on their parents' laps or crawling over the seat backs and along the floor. Rep. Robert Dornan, R-Calif., placed a toddler on the Republican committee table. The child walked along its length, holding onto the congressman's lapels for support. One freshman congressman, Rep. Glenn Poshard, D-Ill., was seen standing in a sixth-floor corridor of the Longworth House Office Building looking at directional signs and muttering to himself. ``Sixteeen-oh-five, 1605,'' Poshard said. ``It's got to be around here somewhere. Which way?'' A reporter escorted the new congressman to his office. In the Senate, children and other senatorial relatives and friends were confined to the galleries, filling every seat. Lady Bird Johnson, sitting near her daughter Lynda, watched son-in-law Charles Rob take the oath of office as a U.S. senator from Virginia. The ceremony occurred on the 40th anniversary of the day her husband, the late President Lyndon B. Johnson, first took his oath as a U.S. senator. The Senate chamber was resplendent. Since the 100th Congress adjourned in October a patterned, dark-blue carpet had been laid, the presiding officer's chair framed with a backdrop of gold curtains bordered with blue and red, and the staff benches in the corners of the chamber upholstered in brilliant scarlet. ``It's obviously all been done for television,'' Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich., told a group of constituents. The convening of the 101st Congress marked a changing of the guard in the Senate. Sen. George Mitchell, D-Maine, is taking over as majority leader from Sen. Robert C. Byrd, D-W.Va. Byrd said the burdens of leadership had been lifted. ``The bags under my eyes are gone,'' he said. Mitchell said he finds his new responsibilities to be challenging. ``I'm not only learning something new every day; I'm learning something new every 10 or 15 minutes,'' he said. One new senator, Republican Conrad Burns of Montana, came to Washington from his only other public office: Commissioner of Yellowstone County. What are the differences between the two jobs? ``Bigger zeroes,'' Burns replied.'' 
Leaders of the newly-convened 101st Congress are speaking kindly of president-elect Bush, and they're talking about cleaning up Capitol Hill's image of corruption _ especially if they can get a pay raise, too. The ceremonial start of the new session on Tuesday gushed with optimism about what could be accomplished in the next two years, with the Congress more firmly in Democratic control and with a new Republican in the White House. ``By working together, we can help our new president fulfill his beautiful promise of a kinder, gentler America,'' said Rep. Jim Wright, D-Texas, upon his re-election Tuesday as Speaker of the House. On the other side of the Capitol, Bush, in his role of vice president, administered the oath of office to new and re-elected senators. Former Majority leader Robert C. Byrd, D-W.Va., was elected president pro tempore of the Senate, as George Mitchell, D-Maine, took the floor in Byrd's old role. In a sign of cooperation, Senate leaders are arranging to speed up work on confirming Bush's appointments. Hearings on Secretary of State-designate James A. Baker III are scheduled to start Jan. 17 _ three days before Bush becomes president and can send the nomination to Congress. Today, Bush leads a joint session of Congress to count the electoral votes that will make him president on Jan. 20. Wright pledged ``the earnest and unstinting cooperation of the leadership of this House'' in helping Bush with his foreign policy goals, and the speaker even thanked his outgoing adversary, President Reagan, for his international successes and ``encouraging the growth and sustenance of politial freedom in countries throughout the world.'' The speaker listed the federal budget and trade deficits and a myriad of social needs as requiring bipartisan cooperation. And he announced that he and Republican leader Bob Michel, R-Ill., will soon appoint a bipartisan panel to review the House's ethics code. Wright himself is at the center of an ethics storm in the Congress. The House ethics committee is investigating allegations that Wright misused his office for personal gain, and that he revealed government secrets. Four House incumbents were defeated in the last election after questions were raised about their personal or campaign finances. Reps. Harold Ford, D-Tenn., and Robert Garcia, D-N.Y., both re-elected, currently are under indictment on criminal charges. Concurrent with the ethics controversy is a new proposal to give lawmakers a pay raise of up to 50 percent, and the two issues have become intertwined. A presidential advisory board has recommended increasing pay for awmakers from the current $89,500 to $135,000, but it said at the same time House and Senate members should be banned from accepting fees for their speeches. Critics contend that allowing members to pocket up to $2,000 for their speeches _ often to lobbying groups _ reinforces the public's low opinion of Capitol Hill ethics. Reagan is expected to propose soon a pay raise smaller than the commission recommended, and that raise would take effect March 1 unless both houses of Congress first vote it down. ``If the president goes ahead and proposes a pay raise we're prepared to go ahead and eliminate the honorariums,'' said Rep. Tony Coelho of California, the third-ranking Democrat in the House. Democratic leaders hope to avoid making members vote on the pay raise, but Republican Rep. Tom Tauke of Iowa announced Tuesday that he was introducing legislation, with the support of three dozen lawmakers from both parties, to prevent any sidestepping. The bill would prevent Congress from taking a pay raise without voting on it first, and would delay the boost until after the next election. ``This legislation not only prevents members from voting for a pay increase for themselves during their current term of office, it would also require each member to take a public stand on this issue,'' he said. ``At the very least, we owe this to our constituents.'' Talk of a tax increase _ something Bush has vowed to fight _ also cropped up as Congress launched another year of battling the federal budget deficit. But leaders refused to let such seriousness interfere with the pomp of the first day. As the top Republican and Democratic officers from both chambers gathered to receive a ceremonial phone call from Reagan, reporters asked about the chances for a tax boost this year. The leaders just laughed. 
Soviet media rapidly reported the downing of two Libyan jet fighters by U.S. Navy warplanes today and made light of American charges that Libya is producing chemical weapons. Tass, the official news agency, moved its first report on the incident as a news briefing at the Foreign Ministry press center was ending. That dispatch, based on an Associated Press report from Washington, did not repeat the U.S. claim that the Navy jets attacked the aircraft after being threatened by them over the Mediterranean. Earlier, morning newspapers warned of an impending U.S. military attack on Libya. Foreign Ministry spokesman Yuri Gremitskikh said any unprovoked attack on the North African nation would merit worldwide condemnation. Gremitskikh, speaking at the news briefing before reports of the Mediterranean incident had been confirmed, blamed increasing tensions in the region on foes of a Middle East settlement. ``I believe someone just doesn't like the beginning of U.S.-Palestinian dialogue and prospects of moving the Israeli-Arab conflict off dead center,'' he said. ``In such circumstances, any unprovoked military action, wherever it comes from, would deal a very serious blow to the process of improving the international climate and would deserve condemnation from the international community, including the Soviet Union,'' Gremitskikh added. The Tass dispatch refrained from any commentary, echoing restraint voiced by the Soviet press in earlier reports about mounting U.S.-Libyan tensions. Despite the Kremlin's public professions of support for Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi, Soviet officials privately say they consider him impetuous and unreliable. U.S. officials say Libya has begun production of chemical weapons at a plant south of the capital, Tripoli. The officials, including President Reagan, have indicated a military strike on the plant is under consideration. Radio Moscow, in its report on the incident, called U.S. charges about the plant ``groundless.'' Gremitskikh noted that Libya has denied any intent of manufacturing chemical weapons and that Gadhafi offered to open the suspect plant to U.S. inspectors. He would not say if the Libyans have requested military aid from the Soviets to meet any U.S. attack. Soviet newspapers today warned of an impending U.S. attack on Libya and made light of the Reagan administration's charges that the North African nation has begun producing chemical weapons. ``Washington's current anti-Libyan campaign is a relapse of the notorious `aircraft carrier policy' that the United States does not at all want to renounce,'' the military daily Red Star claimed. Pravda said the U.S. accusations were designed to detract attention from peace and disarmament proposals that Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev made in a speech to the United Nations last month. ``Generally, this is a well-known scenario,'' the Communist Party daily added. The newspapers used relatively restrained language, which could indicate Soviet wariness about allowing the dispute to damage superpower relations. Both Pravda and Red Star printed photographs of the U.S. nuclear-powered aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt, which the military daily said was leading a 13-ship U.S. battle group toward the Mediterranean. The Pentagon says the ship movements are part of a routine rotation of forces. But Pravda headlined its report ``U.S.A. Is Preparing a Blow Against Libya.'' Pravda reminded readers of the ``barbaric air raids'' by U.S. warplanes against Libya in April 1986 that killed at least 100 people. It said the American ``air pirates'' had then killed women, children and old people. The North African nation, it said, ``has not by chance been chosen again as the target of American interference.'' It said Americans had long been subjected to the stereotype of a ``Libyan enemy,'' and that it was easy for the U.S. government to revive its ``anti-Libyan campaign.'' 
Some 2,000 teachers went on strike today, closing the city's 34,000-student school system. The walkout began after talks failed to produce a new contract. Officials said they planned to keep the schools closed for the duration of the strike but would re-evaluate the decision on a day-to-day basis. Negotiators had agreed to continue talks past a midnight strike deadline, but mediator David Thorley said the teachers walked out because the two sides were nearly as far apart today as they were when the session began Tuesday morning. The mediator said he would call for another session in a few days. The chief issue dividing the two sides is pay. The union asked for a 3 percent raise the first year of a three-year contract and raises of at least 4 percent in the second and third years. The board offered 2.5 percent the first year, 3.2 percent the second and 4 percent the third. About two dozen teachers picketed early today at some of the district's larger buildings, said Janna Bruner, union secretary-treasurer. Striking teachers did not impede other employees from entering, said Joann Robb, a district spokeswoman. ``Everyone's behaving like professionals,'' she said. 
Packed into a church, clustered among tombstones or seated in overflow halls, relatives and townspeople wept and prayed today for the dead of bombed Flight 103 as a minister urged them to turn their thoughts away from vengeance. Lockerbie, the town where most of the Pan Am Boeing 747 crashed after being blown apart by a bomb, came to a standstill for the 40-minute service for the 259 people killed aboard the plane and the 11 residents who died on the ground. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, in black coat and hat, and her husband Denis joined the other mourners, who packed into Dryfesdale Parish Church, clustered among nearby tombstones or sat in crowded hallways. The local people, dignitaries, relatives and Pan Am staff members flown in by the airline for the service sang hymns and prayed. Afterward, the 63-year-old prime minister, who visited the crash site the morning after the disaster, met privately with the relatives in a school. Investigators have concluded a bomb blew up the plane, and suspicions have focused on Middle Eastern terrorists, prompting Mrs. Thatcher to advise the United States publicly against ``eye for an eye'' retaliation. The Right Rev. James Whyte, moderator of the Church of Scotland, echoed that advice. ``Justice, yes. Retaliation, no,'' he told the congregation from the church's marble pulpit. ``We may be tempted, indeed urged by some, to flex our muscles in response, to show that we are men,'' Whyte said. ``To show that we are what? To show that we are prepared to let more young and more innocent die, to let more rescue workers labor in more wreckage to find the grisly proof, not of our virility, but of our inhumanity. ``That is what retaliation means. I, for one, will have none of it, and I hope you will not either.'' The simple, dignified service was televised live to the nation, and to mourners gathered in a local cinema, community hall and church. Many preferred to stand in the chilly rain among the old granite tombstones outside the church, huddled under umbrellas, dressed in windbreakers and cloth caps. The lights of the austere, Presbyterian church shone brightly into the gathering afternoon gloom, and sheep grazed in a field nearby. The Union Jack flew at half-staff. Inside the 91-year-old sandstone church, a man cradled his wife's head as they sang a hymn, and a baby slept on its father's shoulder. For the first time in two weeks, the skies of Lockerbie were silent, empty of the helicopters that have led a massive search for wreckage and bodies over 150 square miles of countryside. Outside the town hall which has become a makeshift mortuary, wreaths lined the sidewalk, and more bouquets were laid outside the church. Pan Am said it flew several hundred employees and relatives of victims to Lockerbie, including Pan Am Chairman Thomas Plaskett. Many employees wore the airline uniform at the service. Neil Kinnock, leader of the opposition Labor Party, also attended, and U.S. Ambassador Charles H. Price II read one of the lessons, from the Gospel according to St. John. Lockerbie's three churches, each of which lost parishioners in Britain's worst air disaster, joined together for the memorial. The Rev. James Annand, minister of the Dryfesdale Church, was joined in offering prayers by Lockerbie's two other ministers _ the Rev. Patrick Keegans of Holy Trinity Roman Catholic Church and the Rev. Alan Neal of the Anglican All Saints parish church. Also present were Lord Jakobovits, chief rabbi of the United Hebrew Congregations of the British Commonwealth; the Most Rev. Edward Luscombe, primate of the Scottish Episcopal Church; and the Most Rev. Thomas Winning, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Glasgow. The Boeing 747 was torn apart by a bomb on Dec. 21 as it reached cruising altitude of 31,000 feet. Wreckage hit homes in Lockerbie, and the fuel-laden wings exploded in a deadly pillar of fire. As search teams continued to hunt for wreckage and victims, police said 126 of the 242 bodies recovered from the crash had been released to relatives. But police said Tuesday they now see little chance of finding the missing bodies of 20 passengers and eight local residents. They are believed to have died in the Sherwood Crescent area of Lockerbie, where parts of the plane's fuselage and wings crashed, forming a 30-foot-deep crater. Between 80 and 90 percent of the plane has been found, but only 20 percent of it has been picked up, police said. Much of it is in inaccessible countryside. The body of Capt. James MacQuarrie, the pilot of Flight 103, was cremated at Carlisle, 25 miles southeast of Lockerbie, on Friday without publicity, said a Pan Am spokesman. The spokesman, who demanded anonymity, said his ashes were carried back to the United States by another unidentified Pan Am captain. 
Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher said today the federal government has no evidence that a West German company helped Libya build a plant to produce chemical weapons. Another official, a spokesman for Genscher, later said West Germany had asked the United States for ``additional material'' to back up claims that a German company helped build the plant. Genscher before the Pentagon announced in Washington that U.S. warplanes today shot down two Libyan fighter jets over the Mediterranean. U.S.-Libyan tensions have been building over American claims that the Libyans have built a plant to make chemical weapons. Speaking at a news conference in Bonn, Genscher said the government ``took very seriously'' allegations that the Imhausen-Chemie company in southwest Baden-Wuerttemberg state was involved in the Libyan plant. The foreign minister said that two days after he and Chancellor Helmut Kohl were informed Nov. 16 of U.S. suspicions that Libya had been helped by the West German company, the government's security council met to discuss the matter. Genscher declined to disclose details of the discussion. ``The government has thus far found no evidence,'' to support the allegations against the West German company, Genscher said. Hanns Schumacher, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, told reporters the government has asked the United States for any additional material to prove the allegations. ``Such material has not yet appeared,'' he said. In Freiburg, district state director Willi Voegele said he has informed the federal Finance Ministry that his investigation has so far found nothing connecting the company with the allegations. Voegele said his office was ordered Dec. 30 to check the company's foreign export contacts. Juergen Hippenstiel-Imhausen, managing director of Imhausen-Chemie, which employs 500 people, has denied the allegations against the firm. The Libyan government insists that the plant is intended to produce pharmaceuticals, not chemical weapons. 
Here are excerpts from recent editorials in newspapers throughout the nation. Dec. 30 Chronicle-Tribune, Marion, Ind., on base closings: If Grissom Air Force Base ... (in Indiana) had been on the list of military facilities to be closed, our attitude might be less charitable. But we don't think so. The recommendation by a government commission that 86 military installations be closed is only the first of several tough decisions the United States must face if the budget deficit ever is to be whipped. From all indications, the recommendations were made for all the right reasons after a careful and thorough study. The primary consideration _ the nation's defense _ should be strengthened by the closing or realignment of the military bases. What do concern us are attemmpts by some congressmen to inject politics into what was a non-political process. There is no cause for any member of Congress to claim victory or defeat based on whether his or her district lost or kept a military facility. ... The process was designed specifically to withstand political pressure from congressmen trying to protect bases in their districts _ and that's the way it appeared to work. ... The closing of the military facilities, while distasteful and painful to some, are more than justified. The savings over the next 20 years are estimated to be $5.6 billion. 
Jan. 1 Oshkosh (Wis.) Northwestern on base closings: The initial reaction to the schedule of military base closings was positive; nobody with power on armed services committees was offended. But there are plenty of Congressmen who have been, and the reverberations from the release of the listings is settling in. Illinois is one unhappy state, what with the inclusion of Chanute Field and Fort Sheridan on the list. California is another big loser. But Texas _ surprise _ loses very little, and the military-base-rich southern states sacrifice very little in comparison to what they have. ... The chances are great that the list _ and the closings _ will be sustained in the process ahead. Retiring Secretary of Defense Frank Carlucci is expected to approve the list _ he can't legally change it _ and it will be up to Congress to act against it if it is not to be implemented. It is quite unlikely that Congress can get enough votes to scuttle the plan. There is something sad about the convolutions of the law that set up the commission and require Congress to vote up or down on the entire package. But time has shown that this is the only way unnecessary military bases will be abandoned. Congress has shown year after year that if it is left to them, politicking will rescue even the most superfluous station. As twisted as is the process, it at least seems at last to be getting the job done. 
Dec. 29 The Westerly (R.I.) Sun on the United Nations: The (United Nations), often maligned in the past as ... ineffective in its principal role as peacekeeper, has of late enjoyed some notable diplomatic successes. Also, under pressure from several nations, ... it has adopted and is now implementing reforms: spending cuts, staff reductions, consensus approval of major financial decisions. The General Assembly's approval of spending plans clears the way for payment of the balance _ $58 million _ of the $144 million appropriated by Congress for the organization this year. Unpaid U.N. dues to go into the regular budget amount to $337.2 million currently, and in addition we owe $94.1 million for our country's share of the cost of vital peacekeeping operations. Now that reforms are well under way and the congressional U.N. detractors no longer have much legitimate cause for griping, we should pay up with minimal further delay. 
Dec. 30 Alamogordo (N.M.) Daily News on base closings: Many of the communities near the 86 bases under recommendation by a government commission for closure will feel the economic pinch if the recommendations are approved. But the nation's economy has to be taken into consideration as well. Right now, the nation has a large deficit to deal with. Consolidating bases and closing down inefficient bases makes a lot of sense. The recommendations made by the commission seemed to be good ones. This country has too many problem areas such as the homeless, AIDS and education to be wasting taxpayers' money needlessly. 
Jan. 2 The Morning News Tribune, Tacoma, Wash., on ``African Americans'': It may not catch on, but describing Americans of African descent as ``African Americans'' is a good idea. The new term has been coming into favor among some black writers and civil rights leaders for several years now. Jesse Jackson called attention to the trend _ and endorsed it wholeheartedly _ at a recent civil rights conference in Chicago. ``Every ethnic group in this country has a reference to some land base, some historical cultural base,'' he said. ``African Americans have hit that level of maturity.'' ... More importantly, the term ``African American'' avoids any reference to skin pigmentation, which ought to be irrelevant in today's America. Far more relevant are the culture and experience shared by a people. In the case of black Americans, that experience has been shaped by centuries of oppression, beginning with the forcible abduction and enslavement of their African ancestors. Blacks hung on to their African heritage in the face of slavery and racism, creating a rich and distinctive new culture. That culture can't be understood without taking into account its African roots. ``African American'' reflects those roots. It also reflects a pride in being both African AND American _ the kind of pride felt by Greek Americans, Polish Americans and others whose ancestors came to America by choice and suffered less in the new land. If most blacks now choose to call themselves African Americans, the rest of the country should oblige them _ and feel honored. 
Dec. 30 Charleston (W.Va.) Daily Mail on pensions for state employees: The state Supreme Court has found the self-evident: If the state promises pensions, it must actually set aside the money to pay them. West Virginia politicians have done many things, but not that. It will be interesting to see them comply with court orders enforcing common sense. The justices ruled ... that the state has shorted the Public Employees Retirement System Association by at least $80 million over the last four years. Sometimes, the governor did it. Sometimes, legislators did. The court ordered the state to repay the money within four years. The ruling represents a good day's work in the system of checks and balances. State employees, cheated by the executive and legislative branches of government, were rescued by the judiciary. The court did the right thing. Now about the Teachers Retirement Fund ... 
A leading British conservative said today that Libya may have ``paid the price'' for its aggressive stance toward the United States in the downing of two Libyan warplanes by the U.S. Navy. Soviet media quickly reported today's fighting over the Mediterranean. Earlier, a Soviet official said unprovoked attacks on Libya would merit worldwide condemnation in which the Soviets would join. In West Germany, opposition leaders said they were surprised by the incident. In Spain, Foreign Ministry spokesman Juan Lena said Spain ``follows with attention and concern the development of events.'' The Pentagon reported two of Libya's Soviet-built MiG-23s were shot down early today by U.S. F-14s from the aircraft carrier John F. Kennedy. The incident was the first fighting between the United States and Libya since U.S. jets bombed Libya in 1986. Roman Popadiuk, deputy White House press secretary, said in Los Angeles that the U.S. warplanes acted in self-defense after the Libyan aircraft approached them ``in hostile manner over international waters.'' Tensions between the two nations rose recently over Libya's construction of a plant the United States says is intended to produce chemical weapons. Roland Dumas, the French foreign minister, said he hoped the incident would not dominate an upcoming chemical weapons conference in France. The meeting will bring together more than 140 countries Jan. 7-11 to discuss expanding a 1925 treaty banning the use of chemical weapons. Dumas said the downing of the jets ``reinforces the need for this kind of international conference.'' Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher of West Germany said today the federal government has no independent verification that a West German company helped build the plant, as the United States has charged. Michael Mates of Britain's governing Conservative Party and chairman of the parliamentary committee on defense, told the British Broadcasting Corp.: ``If the Libyans have made an offensive gesture toward the United States, I'm not surprised they've been shot down, because they're not a friendly nation, they have committed many aggressive acts against the United States.'' He said Libya has tried to deny the United States access to disputed waters. ``They tried to make false claims within the area of the Mediterranean to keep out American troops who are entirely entitled to be in international waters, and if they've paid the price, well, that's tough.'' British lawmaker Gerald Kaufman, the opposition Labor Party's spokesman on foreign affairs, told BBC television: ``The Americans ought to show the utmost caution and they really will need to justify this activity if they're going to get any support or even understanding from our country.'' ``Lockerbie (the Pan Am plane crash last month) was an outrage of the foulest kind. Britain has every right to be angry. The Americans have every right to be angry. But as (Prime Minister) Mrs. (Margaret) Thatcher said, an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth is not the way of dealing with it.'' He recalled that in 1986 Britain allowed Washington to use bombers based on British soil to bomb Libya _ an attack staunchly defended by Mrs. Thatcher and denounced by the Labor Party. He said the Americans then acted ``in a very rash and foolish way,'' and if the latest incident was part of a move to destroy an alleged chemical weapons plant in Libya, ``I would regard that as unacceptable, not because in any way I would support or accept that Libya should manufacture chemical weapons, but because it is unacceptable for one country to attack another internally because it disagrees with what it's doing.'' In Moscow, Foreign Ministry spokesman Yuri Gremitskikh, commenting before receiving word of the U.S.-Libyan exchange, said: ``I believe someone just doesn't like the beginning of U.S.-Palestinian dialogue and prospects of moving the Israeli-Arab conflict off dead-center.'' ``In such circumstances, any unprovoked military action, wherever it comes from, would deal a very serious blow to the process of improving the international climate and would deserve condemnation from the international community, including the Soviet Union.'' 
A panel of independent and drug industry scientists began today trying to hasten the process for approving new drugs to treat cancer and AIDS, a task its chairman says must balance patient safety against the need for speedy treatment. ``While safety and efficacy must remain of paramount importance in permitting the use of new drugs, it is also critical that the Food and Drug Administration's regulatory procedures be such as to not unduly hinder the rapid transfer of new agents to patients with cancer and AIDS,'' said Dr. Armand Hammer, chairman of the President's Cancer Panel, which appointed the drug study panel. Hammer said the panel of experts has been asked by President-elect Bush to review current drug approval procedures and determine whether the regulatory processes governing cancer and AIDS drugs should be different from the processes governing development of drugs for diseases that are not life-threatening. Speaking to reporters after his address to the panel meeting at the National Institutes of Health, Hammer said he believes the approval process for cancer and AIDS drugs should be shortened from the current period, which varies from two to three years, to less than one year. ``We're not going to sacrifice safety and speed,'' he said. ``We're going to combine safety and speed.'' Hammer said the FDA's recent announcement of new streamlined procedures to move drug approvals more quickly are inadequate, though he did not elaborate. However, he said, the involvement of leading pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies on the study panel will provide valuable insight into the approval process. Dr. Anthony Fauci, the AIDS coordinator at the National Institutes of Health, said ``extraordinary'' progress has already been made in AIDS research, though no cure has been found and only one drug has been approved for treatment of AIDS _ AZT, which has been shown to prolong the lives of certain AIDS patients. ``There is a lot of despair out there, and that's understandable because of the terrible scourge of this disease,'' he told panelists. He said scientists are ``cautiously optimistic'' that they will develop a drug or combination of drugs within the next few years to prolong the lives of AIDS victims. However, he said, there is unlikely that a single drug will be developed that cures the disease. 
A survivor of a massacre in a Japanese prisoner of war camp is trying to find the woman who left a message on his telephone answering machine saying she remembered him and his buddies. The message, apparently prompted by news stories on the 44th anniversary of the massacre, was cut off before Mary Ann from Wisconsin gave her full name and hometown, said Glenn McDole of Des Moines. ``This is one of those times I wish I didn't have one of those telephone answering machines,'' said McDole. ``We didn't get the whole message and I don't know how to reach her.'' McDole, 67, was a prisoner for 33 months during World War II. In December 1944, he was one of 11 prisoners who escaped a massacre on the Philippine island of Palawan in which 139 others were doused with gasoline and burned or shot. He and two other remaing survivors attended an observance at the Washington Monument last month to mark the 44th anniversary of the massacre. Someone in Wisconsin named Mary Ann read about the observance, and called McDole. The woman said she lived on Palawan Island during the war and remembers ``you 11 men'' who survived Palawan Prison. ``You can hear her on the tape starting to say something else,'' said McDole's daughter, Kathy Tews. ``But then there's just silence.'' McDole, chief of the patrol division of the Polk County Sheriff's Department, said he was one of about 20 men who tried to escape when their Japanese captors ordered 150 men into trenches, doused them with gasoline and set them afire. Eleven survived. McDole said he hid in a garbage dump and, with the help of Filipinos, made his way to another part of the island. He later was rescued by an American plane. 
Federal prosecutors have dropped criminal cases against 17 pilots in Orlando and Tampa charged with concealing drug and alcohol convictions on government forms. U.S. Attorney Robert Genzman said Tuesday the cases were dismissed so that the 11th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Atlanta can decide whether the Federal Aviation Administraion medical forms filled out by pilots are vague. Four related cases from Tampa have been appealed to the higher court, and Genzman said prosecutors could reinstate the 17 dismissed cases if the four cases are upheld. They were the first in a national crackdown on pilots failing to report convictions on FAA forms. Federal officials said they were taking the action to ensure air safety. U.S. District Judge George Carr threw out cases against five pilots in Tampa last month, ruling that the FAA medical forms were ``fundamentally unfair.'' 
A prison parolee demanding a plane to Libya grabbed about 20 hostages in a restaurant, killing one before he was fatally shot by police, who accidentally killed another hostage, officials said today. The gunman, Wayne Strozzi, 35, also wounded two officers before he died at McKee Medical Center late Tuesday, authorities said. Strozzi, who was paroled in 1987 after serving 13 months on cocaine charges, first assaulted his girlfriend at her apartment, police said. Police then chased him on foot to the Riverhouse Restaurant, said Sgt. Ray Miller. At the restaurant, Strozzi held about 20 patrons and staff at gunpoint for about an hour, demanding a plane to Libya, Miller said. Strozzi apparently was angry that his girlfriend had begun dating another man, police said. Sally Mills, a waitress at the restaurant, and Fenton Crookshank, a customer, were killed, said Larimer County District Attorney Stu VanMeveren. Mills, in her 40s, was shot by Strozzi as snipers fired on the gunman, VanMeveren said. Crookshank, 45, was killed by a police officer as the patron dove through a bathroom window in an attempt to flee, he said. VanMeveren refused to name the officer who shot Crookshank. Police said Crookshank had failed to respond to orders to halt as he jumped out the window and approached officers. Another female hostage was treated and released for cuts on her foot caused by shattered glass, authorities said. Officer Joe Berdin and Sheriff's Deputy J. Hirokawa suffered gunshot wounds to the arms, said Carol Matheis-Kraft, assistant hospital administrator. Berdin was listed in good condition and Hirokawa was treated and released. The trouble began at 6:45 p.m. when police in this city of 30,000 people 50 miles north of Denver responded to a disturbance at the home of Strozzi's girlfriend, who had been assaulted, Miller said. After fleeing to his house, Strozzi shot Hiorkawa and was chased to the restaurant, where he took the hostages and readied a getaway car. As he walked outside holding his semi-automatic pistol to the head of diner Belva Bethel, he spotted officer Berdin in the parking lot and shot him in the shoulder. Strozzi then pulled the woman back into the restaurant at gunpoint and began making demands. ``He said he was going to waste everybody,'' said Jim Carr, a member of a club that was meeting in the restaurant basement. The club members escaped out the back. One hostage was Ms. Bethel's husband, Steve Bethel, a 32-year-old reserve officer with the Police Department who said he cooperated and tried not to intimidate the gunman. ``I couldn't tell if he was drunk, but he was on some kind of drug, I know that,'' Bethel said. Strozzi released about a half dozen hostages before shooting the waitress about 9 p.m., while police negotiated by megaphone. Police snipers then opened fire, shooting Strozzi at least three times in the head and abdomen. Crookshank was shot about the same time, police said. 
About 86,000 Hungarians opposed to the construction of a Danube River power project have signed a petition calling for a referendum on the plant, the state news agency MTI reported Wednesday. President Bruno F. Straub said Tuesday night a referendum on the plan was ``inconceivable,'' because parliament has decided to go ahead with the project. Environmentalists, who say the plant will destroy wildlife, wetlands and drinking water supplies, began the campaign in November because they believed parliament's decision in October did not reflect the will of the people. The session approved construction of the Nagymaros power plant, which together with a hydropower station in Gabcikovo, Czechoslovakia, is to be one of the biggest power generation plants on the Danube. Environmentalists plan to present the proposal for a referendum to Straub's Presidential Council or to parliament once they reach 100,000 signatures, the agency said. Straub ruled out a last-minute change in an interview on Budapest TV, saying: ``Collecting signatures is a movement by young people who want to use the chance to protest against something.'' 
The military government has adopted a broad range of austerity measures to go along with a stringent 1989 budget announced by President Ibrahim Babangida. The ruling Armed Forces Council announced Tuesday a 200 percent tax on cigarettes, a 50 percent increase in the price of fertilizer and a 15 percent tax on deposits held in Nigerian bank accounts. The government also canceled a meal subsidy for senior civil servants that was approved last year, and imposed a 15 percent withholding tax on fees paid to company directors. Import duties were raised on a broad range of goods, while 15 items, including livestock, vegetables, processed wood and fabrics, were placed on a prohibited import list. Earlier this week, a 42 percent increase in gasoline prices for private users was announced. A gasoline price increase in June sparked demonstrations in the capital. Nigeria has been suffering economic problems because of reduced prices for oil, its chief export. It has a foreign debt of $25 billion. The annual budget announced Sunday called for expenditures of about $7 billion against revenues of about $6.8 billion. 
Madrid officials ordered limits on the use of coal-burning heaters and inner-city parking by non-residents Wednesday, a day after the city declared a smog alert. The decision was made after weather forecasters said conditions would keep a layer of smog over the city until Monday, said Lucio Pita, head of the city's environmental protection department. Anti-pollution measures included limiting the use of coal-burning heating systems to between 11 a.m. and 7 p.m., banning all parking by non-residents on 42 streets and imposing fines of up to $134 for cars emitting excessive exhaust. The maximum fine for using a heater during banned hours amounted to $760. ``The situation is not of danger, but of precaution,'' Pita said. 
Here is a transcript of the Pentagon briefing Wednesday by Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci and Adm. William Crowe, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, on the incident in which two U.S. Navy planes shot down two Libyan jet fighters over the Mediterranean Sea. Carlucci: Good morning. The chairman and I here to present the facts of the Libyan incident, as we understand them at this point. And let me emphasize that. These are preliminary reports, and preliminary reports are never 100 percent accurate. There are always changes in detail. But in the interest of getting to the American public and the world in general the information that we have, we're going to present a statement based on that information, but I urge you to take into account the fact that preliminary reports sometimes do change. This morning at about 5 a.m. Eastern Standard Time, or 12 a.m. local time in the Mediterranean, two Libyan MiG-23 aircraft were shot down in self-defense by American F-14s with air-to-air missiles. Two parachutes were sighted, and a Libyan search-and-rescue helicopter was later detected headed for the area. The U.S. Navy aircraft were operating from the aircraft carrier USS John F. Kennedy, which was off the southwest tip of Crete and about 127 miles north of Tobruk, Libya. (Indicates location on map.) And there you have the location of the aircraft. Tobruk is down in this region. At the time of the incident, both the ship and its aircraft were conducting training operations in international waters. The two F-14s, and you have the F-14 location right here (indicates on map) were providing combat air patrol approximately 50 miles south of the Kennedy, which is some 70 miles north of the northeast Libyan coast. The MiG aircraft were detected shortly after they left Al Bumbah _ (indicates on map) _ that's right here _ at about 4:50 a.m. Eastern Standard Time and were tracked as they closed the two F-14 aircraft. 
The F-14 pilots maneuvered to avoid the closing aircraft. They changed speed, altitude, and direction. The Libyan aircraft continued to close in a hostile manner. At about 14 miles, the U.S. section leader decided his aircraft was in jeopardy, and they could wait no longer. One MiG-23 was shot down with a Sparrow missile. The second MiG was shot down by a Sidewinder missile at six miles. These 6th Fleet ships and aircraft were operating in international waters and international airspace at the time of the incident and posed no threat to Libya. These routine operations are of the same type that have been conducted in the same area many times in the past. The 6th Fleet operations have no connection whatsoever with Libya's newly constructed chemical facility. These operations, which were conducted over 600 miles northeast of the plant _ and the plant is right down in this region here _ (using map). So, you see where the carrier is, and it's 600 miles away. It had nothing to do whatsoever with that plant. We now consider this matter closed. Admiral Crowe and I are now prepared to take your questions. Q. Mr. Secretary _ Q. _ what were the indications of hostile intent? You've mentioned the fact that the Libyan planes continued to close. What else, if anything, was there that told the pilots the Libyans had hostile intentions? Carlucci: Bear in mind what I said earlier, that these are preliminary reports. The pilots are being flown to Naples for a detailed debrief. So, we will not know the actual maneuvers that took place until we have the detailed debrief from the pilots. But, based on our current information _ and I emphasize that point _ the pilots descended in altitude from approximately 15,000 feet to 4,000 feet, and they took some five different evasive actions, and each time the Libyan aircraft sought to put their nose on our aircraft; they also accelerated. So, the hostile intent seems to be fairly clear. Q. Mr. Secretary, was the _ what were the rules of engagement that were _ Carlucci: Normal peacetime rules of engagement. Q. Mr. Secretary _ Carlucci: No change _ there has been no change in the rules of engagement. Q. Mr. Secretary _ Q. And there were no communication required then _ Q. _ who gave the OK to fire? Q. _ between the F-14s and the Kennedy? Carlucci: Excuse me? Q. They didn't have to go back to the Kennedy and ask for weapons release authority or anything like that? 
Libya today formally requested an emergency meeting of the Security Council to condemn ``American aggression'' in the downing of two Libyan jets over the Mediterranean. Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar issued a statement saying he ``regrets the incident and hopes both sides will exercise restrain so as not to heighten existing tension in the region.'' Libyan Ambassador Ali Sunni Muntasser met the Security Council president, Ismail Razali of Malaysia, and told reporters later he had delivered a letter requesting the urgent session. No date for a session was mentioned. ``Without a doubt, we ask for condemnation of this premeditated act,'' said Muntasser. He said the Libyan planes shot down today were ``unarmed, on reconnaissance, ordinary, routine flying.'' U.S. officials said the American planes opened fire after the Libyan planes threatened them. ``We ask the Security Council to discuss this latest American aggression against Libya,'' Muntasser said. ``I am saying to you they (the planes) were unarmed,'' he said. ``They were reconnaissance planes and everyone knows reconnaissance planes are not the planes of aggression or attack.'' He refused to say if Libya would retaliate. U.N. spokesman Francois Giuliani told reporters that Perez de Cuellar had been informed that official letters about the clash were being sent today from Washington and Tripoli. 
Here are some recent developments in U.S.-Libyan relations following the American contention that Libya had become able to manufacture chemical weapons. Sept. 14: The State Department says Libya now can produce chemical weapons and calls that ``a particularly worrisome development'' in light of a ``dangerous precedent'' of use of such weapons in the Iran-Iraq war and ``the general record of irresponsible behavior on the part of (Libyan leader Moammar) Gadhafi.'' Oct. 4: In a speech at the United Nations, the Libyan foreign minister again demands compensation for the 1986 U.S. air attack on two Libyan cities, an attack in which 41 people were killed. Oct. 25: CIA Director William Webster says a Libyan chemical plant is the largest of its kind the agency has detected. Webster says later he meant the plant is the largest of its kind in the developing world. Oct. 26: Ambassador L. Paul Bremer, the government's top antiterrorism expert, says there was no evidence Libyan planned to arm terrorists with chemicals but reason to fear it might. ``They have no record of restraint,'' he says. Nov. 25: A Libyan official tells Italy his country adheres to international prohibitions on the use of chemicals weapons. Those prohibitions do not cover manufacture or ownership. Dec. 19: The State Department says Libya is on the verge of full-scale production and calls on all countries to deny related technology to Libya, Iran and Iraq. Dec. 21: In a televised interview, President Reagan says the United States has discussed military action against the chemical weapons plant with allies, and ``that's a decision that has not been made yet.'' Dec. 22: Libya denies it has built a chemical weapons plant and says doctors, nurses and pharmacists are planning a sit-in, apparently to discourage any attack on what it says is a pharmaceutical factory. White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater says ``military action is an option. We're not ruling it out.'' Dec. 23: President-elect Bush says he shares Reagan's determination to prevent the plant from spreading ``further destruction,'' but declines to spell out what he thinks should be done. The Arab League says it is not true that Libya is producing chemical weapons. Dec. 25: Iran, Iraq and Syria announce support for Libya in the dispute. Dec. 28: Reagan extends for six months U.S. economic sanctions against Libya, first imposed in 1986. The action froze Libyan assets in the United States and forbade certain dealings with Libya, including oil production by U.S. companies there. Dec. 29: Libya's ambassador to Tunisia predicts better relations with the United States under the incoming Bush administration. The ambassador repeats denials that his country has built a chemical weapons plant. Dec. 30: The United States rejects an offer by Gadhafi, conveyed through Italy, for an international inspection of the plant. A single inspection ``could not be conclusive'' because the plant ``could easily be modified to appear as a legitimate industrial chemical plant,'' the State Department says. Jan. 3, 1989: The State Department says it has proof Libya has begun limited production, and says the United States will raise the issue at a NATO meeting in Paris beginning Saturday while ``there is still time to do something about it.'' The Defense Department says the sailing of an aircraft carrier battle group from Norfolk, Va. to the Mediterranean is a standard deployment. Jan. 4: The Pentagon announces the shooting down of two Libyan fighters by U.S. planes. The Washington Post reports the plant suffered a spill of toxic chemicals last summer. The New York Times and ABC-TV report recent movement of chemical raw materials out of the plant. 
Keebler Co. said today it will eliminate tropical oils and lard from its cookies and crackers to reduce cholesterol. The company also said it would begin listing nutritional values on its packages. Keebler snacks made without tropical oils and lard should begin appearing on shelves in March, said Thomas Garvin, president and chief executive officer. Tropical oils are heavy in saturated fats, which can be converted by the body into artery-blocking cholesterol. Lard is high in cholesterol. By the end of 1989, no Keebler product will contain coconut oil, palm oil, palm kernel oil, lard or beef fat, said Keebler spokesman Stuart Greenblatt. They will be replaced with vegetable oil lower in saturated fat, he said. Butter and cheese, both of which contain fat, will be used in some products, he said. ``We've been working on the reformulation for more than a year,'' Garvin said. ``We're extremely proud to respond to consumer concerns about these ingredients by replacing them with more healthful oils.'' Greenblatt would not disclose the cost of reformulating the products but said the decision would not affect prices. Under the new labeling, Keebler products will show the number of calories and amount of protein, carbohydrates, vitamins, sodium, cholesterol and other nutritional categories per serving, Greenblatt said. 
make this judgment on his own.    Q. Did the lead pilot fire both missiles, Mr. Secretary? Did he fire both the Sparrow and the Sidewinder?    Carlucci: I think both aircraft fired.    I think the lead probably was the one that hit.    Crowe: It's clear both aircraft fired.    One was hit with a Sidewinder and one was hit with a Sparrow.    We think they both came from the lead aircraft, but both aircraft did fire missiles.    Q. Is that a total of four missiles?    Carlucci: Yes.    Q. Libya has been bloodied in the past by confronting the U.S. with planes and ships. Why would they do this?    Carlucci: You'll have to ask them, not us. Q. Well, they had said they expected the U.S. to attack Libya because of this chemical weapons plant.    Carlucci: All I can do is emphasize that these were routine carrier maneuvers, a carrier battle group that has been in the Mediterranean steadily.    We've had them there for years. It was on a normal training mission.    It is enroute to port. It will continue enroute to port.    This has nothing whatsoever to do with all the speculation _ and if I may say, excessive speculation _ that has existed _    Q. We in no way provoked them, or drew them into this?    Carlucci: Absolutely not.    Q. Mr. Secretary, how long had the carrier actually been in the general vicinity, within 100 or 120 miles of Libya?    Carlucci: Well, it had been steaming eastward in the Mediterranean. I don't know how long it had been in that vicinity. ( o Crowe) _ Bill, maybe _    Crowe: Since the Christmas vacation.    Q. And had it been conducting flight operations on a continuing basis during that time? Crowe: A few hours each day.    Q. Mr. Secretary _    Q. _ have the activities of the Libyans been normal? Have they been checking out U.S. aircraft a little more than routine lately?    Carlucci: We had not noticed any abnormal activities until this incident.    Q. Mr. Secretary, does that Libyan chemical plant pose any imminent threat to the region, and what, if any, threats to U.S. interests?    Carlucci: The State Department has indicated that we are gravely concerned with that chemical facility, and I don't think it would be appropriate to go beyond that statement. Q. Mr. Secretary, you mentioned excessive speculation on the part _ when we were talking about this Libyan chemical plant. What has been excessive speculation? What is your concern about that?    Carlucci: Well, I've seen all kinds of details and speculation come out in the press.    I know that you all have your sources, and you all think that your sources are infallible.    But quite frankly, they are not.    And I've seen a number of details come out in the press that are not accurate.    I've seen a number of reports of what the Pentagon is thinking _ thinking that has never been brought to my attention. 
Breyers Yogurt was ordered recalled from stores in New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Delaware after a cyanide-laced container of the product left a teen-ager in critical condition, authorities said. Investigators in Camden County called Tuesday's incident an isolated case of tampering because tests on more than 100 similar yogurt containers turned up no sign of cyanide. However, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said it would inspect a manufacturing plant in South Edmeston, N.Y., today and re-examine the carton. ``We need to go back and take a closer look,'' said Matthew Lewis, an FDA district supervisor in West Orange. Lewis said initial inspections of the carton and lid of Breyers black cherry yogurt revealed no pinholes. ``We're all trying to find out where this happened,'' he said. ``Right now, we don't have any leads.'' Tests by the FDA in Philadelphia confirmed the presence of cyanide in the container late Tuesday. Thomas Lee, 17, of Haddonfield, was in critical condition early today, said Florence Rowe, a nursing supervisor at West Jersey Health System's eastern division in Voorhees. The cyanide was found in an 8-ounce container of Breyers black cherry yogurt with the code date Feb. 9, 1989. Officials say the yogurt was purchased Jan. 1 at an Acme supermarket in Westmont in southern New Jersey. ``Acme Markets Inc., in cooperation with Kraft, has voluntarily issued a recall of all flavors of Breyers Yogurt from all 166 Acme stores in the Delaware Valley,'' said Walt Rubel, spokesman for Acme in Malvern, Pa. Kraft Inc. Dairy Group, based in Philadelphia, owns Breyers Yogurt. The Delaware Valley generally is considered southern New Jersey, southeastern Pennsylvania and Delaware. Acme also has removed all other yogurt from five of its Camden County stores, the Health Department said. George Kerns, a spokesman for Camden County prosecutor's office, said the cyanide appeared to have been on the top of the yogurt and not stirred in. He said tests of 130 other samples of yogurt from the Acme stores found no contamination. Kraft said it is cooperating with the FDA, local law enforcement and public health authorities in the investigation. The company said Breyers yogurt packages have a tamper-evident seal. Kerns said Lee's mother had purchased a batch of yogurt from the store and two other containers had been eaten without any side effects. Lee became ill while eating the yogurt on his way to school with friends. He had eaten about a third of the container before he began vomiting blood, Kerns said. The worst known case of cyanide tampering in the country occurred in 1982, when seven people in the Chicago area died after consuming tainted Tylenol. 
Two contrasting chronicles of brotherly relations _ the drama ``Rain Man'' and the comedy ``Twins'' _ commanded 1988's frantic final weekend at the movies, according to box office figures from Exhibitor Relations Co. The No. 1 film, ``Rain Man,'' starring Dustin Hoffman as an autistic savant on the road with his scheming brother, played by Tom Cruise, sold $14.4 million worth of tickets. ``Twins,'' featuring Danny DeVito and Arnold Schwarzenegger as unlikely siblings separated at birth, finished second with sales of $12.1 million, according to figures released Tuesday. With these two films passing the $10 million mark, business during the four-day New Year's weekend was up sharply from a year ago. The Top 10 movies this New Year's weekend gathered approximately $69.8 million, up 24 percent from 1987's Top 10 grosses of $56.1 million. The Christmas weekend, however, reflected a 15 percent decline from a year ago. Last year's winter hits were ``Three Men and a Baby,'' ``Throw Momma from the Train,'' ``Eddie Murphy Raw'' and ``Broadcast News.'' ``The Naked Gun: From the Files of Police Squad!,'' a satirical look at sleuthing with Leslie Nielsen, came in third over the weekend on receipts of $7.9 million. It was followed by the animated ``Oliver and Co.,'' the Oliver Twist-inspired tale of a homeless kitten, with grosses of $7.4 million. Two sophisticated comedies, ``Working Girl'' and ``Dirty Rotten Scoundrels,'' finished in fifth and sixth place, respectively. ``Working Girl,'' the Cinderella corporate story featuring Melanie Griffith as an ambitious secretary, collected $7.3 million. ``Dirty Rotten Scoundrels,'' with Steve Martin and Michael Caine as dueling con men, claimed box office revenues of $6.5 million. ``Tequila Sunrise,'' starring Mel Gibson as a drug dealer trying to start over in life with restaurant owner Michelle Pfeiffer, was seventh with receipts of $4.6 million. In eighth place was the animated ``The Land Before Time,'' about a baby dinosaur's travels in a prehistoric world, on sales of $3.7 million. Rounding out the Top 10 were ``Scrooged,'' Bill Murray's reworking of the Charles Dickens Christmas classic, with revenues of $3.3 million, and the horror film ``Hellbound: Hellraiser II,'' with sales of $2.6 million. Of the new holiday films in limited release, the two most successful were ``The Accidental Tourist,'' with a per-screen average of $44,033 in five theaters nationwide, and ``Beaches,'' with a per-screen average of $38,435 in seven movie houses. Here are the top movies for the four-day weekend as tallied by Exhibitor Relations, with distributor, weekend gross, number of theater screens, average per screen, total gross and number of weeks in release. 1. ``Rain Man,'' United Artists, $14.4 million, 1,254 screens, $11,448 per screen, $42.5 million, three weeks. 2. ``Twins,'' Universal, $12.1 million, 1,624 screens, $7,420 per screen, $55.6 million, four weeks. 3. ``The Naked Gun,'' Paramount, $7.9 million, 1,969 screens, $4,035 per screen, $47.9 million, five weeks. 4. ``Oliver and Co.,'' Disney, $7.4 million, 1,503 screens, $4,926 per screen, $40.2 million, seven weeks. 5. ``Working Girl,'' 20th Century Fox, $7.3 million, 1,060 screens, $6,930 per screen, $16.7 million, two weeks. 6. ``Dirty Rotten Scoundrels,'' Orion, $6.5 million, 1,511 screens, $4,274 per screen, $22.3 million, three weeks. 7. ``Tequila Sunrise,'' Warner Bros., $4.6 million, 1,411 screens, $3,228 per screen, $28.6 million, five weeks. 8. ``The Land Before Time,'' Universal, $3.7 million, 1,414 screens, $2,635 per screen, $38 million, seven weeks. 9. ``Scrooged,'' Paramount, $3.3 million, 1,877 screens, $1,736 per screen, $54.9 million, six weeks. 10. ``Hellbound: Hellraiser II,'' New World, $2.6 million, 1,187 screens, $2,173 per screen, $7.4 million, two weeks. 
Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi today called the U.S. downing of two Libyan jets in the Mediterranean an act of increased ``American terrorism,'' the official Libyan news agency reported. Gadhafi vowed to ``meet challenge with challenge,'' JANA said in a dispatch monitored in London. The reaction came about six hours after the Libyan jets were shot down by aircraft from the U.S. 6th Fleet. ``In spite of the increase in official American terrorism, which is backed by brute force, and in spite of the threats, the revolutionaries of great Libya will not bow their heads and will not abandon their principles and the objectives of their eternal motherland of unity, liberation and the building of progress,'' Gadhafi declared, according to JANA. ``If America has prevailed because it is a superpower in the air and the sea, it will inevitably be defeated on land. We, as well as the fish, are awaiting them,'' Gadhafi was quoted as saying. Libya today formally requested an emergency meeting of the U.N. Security Council to condemn the U.S. action. Ali Sunni Muntasser, Libya's ambassador to the United Nations, said the Libyan planes had been unarmed. No date was set for the Security Council session. Also today, the Yugoslavian news agency Tanjug reported Gadhafi has asked the Soviet Union to use its navy to help prevent a U.S.-Libyan clash in the Mediterranean. Libya's Foreign Ministry said the U.S. shot down the Libyan jet fighters in a ``premeditated attack.'' And Libya's ambassador to Italy said the downing of the planes was linked to U.S. allegations that Libya has built a chemical weapons plant. ``At 1103 hours (5:03 a.m. EST) while two Libyan reconnaissance aircraft were carrying out a patrol over international waters, U.S. aircraft carried out a premeditated attack on them and shot them down,'' Libyan radio said, quoting a statement by the Foreign Ministry in Tripoli, the Libyan capital. White House officials said the American aircraft opened fire after being threatened. The Pentagon reported the Soviet-built MiG-23s were shot down by U.S. F-14s from the aircraft carrier John F. Kennedy in the Mediterranean. It was the first fighting between the United States and Libya since U.S. jets bombed Tripoli in 1986. Libyan Ambassador Abdel Rahman Shalgam called today's incident ``a unilateral act'' and a ``dangerous'' action of escalation by the United States in its response to the chemical plant situation. He declined to say how Libya would respond. On Tuesday, U.S. officials said for the first time they had evidence the plant had begun producing limited quantities of chemical weapons. Libyan officials, including Gadhafi, have insisted the plant near Tripoli will make pharmaceuticals and offered to let international experts inspect the facility. The Reagan administration has rejected the offer for a one-time inspection. Referring to the U.S. insistence that the plant is a chemical weapons facility, Shalgam said of the U.S. administration: ``Why don't they wait'' until the start of an international conference on chemical weapons, scheduled to begin this weekend in Paris. ``We are willing to accept any international measure'' regarding chemical arms, he said, as long as it applied to all nations, but he said the United States was evidently not willing to do so. He stressed that Libya said it would open the plant in a few weeks for inspection ``so that the whole world could see.'' 
The U.S. downing of two Libyan jet fighters Wednesday was the latest in a series of military clashes between the two countries during President Reagan's eight-year tenure. On April 14, 1986, waves of U.S. land-based and carrier-based warplanes carried out a series of middle-of-the-night bombing raids on Libya. The U.S. planes dumped one bomb 10 yards from the residence of Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi in his Tripoli fortress headquarters, reportedly killing his baby daughter. Two crewmen from a U.S. F-111 were killed in the action. President Reagan ordered the 1986 attack in retaliation for what U.S. officials said was Libyan involvement in the bombing of a nightclub in Berlin frequented by U.S. soldiers. A U.S. soldier and a Turkish woman were killed by the Berlin bomb. Among U.S. allies in Europe, only Britain cooperated, and other countries refused to permit U.S. planes to fly over their territories. As a result, the British-based F-111s used in the attack had to be refueled in the air several times in a long dog-leg flight over the Atlantic ocean, through the Straits of Gibraltar and over the Mediterranean to Libya. On March 24, 1986, Libya fired surface-to-air missiles, missing U.S. aircraft. The United States retaliated, saying it hit two Libyan patrol boats and a missile battery at Sirte, Libya. The following day, the United States renewed its attack, hitting the missile site again and two more Libyan boats. In June 1983, Navy F-14s intercepted two Libyan fighters outside the Gulf of Sidra, but there was no shooting. An armed confrontation on Aug. 19, 1981, was similar to today's incident. Two Soviet built MiG-23s were downed today by F-14 planes from the aircraft carrier John F. Kennedy. There were no U.S. casualties; officials said two Libyan parachutes were seen. In the 1981 clash, U.S. F-14 fighters shot down two Soviet-built Libyan SU-22 fighter planes over the Mediterranean in a one-minute battle off the Libyan coast. The Pentagon said the planes were shot down after an ``unprovoked attack'' by the Libyans as the U.S. jets from the aircraft carrier USS Nimitz patrolled above a Navy task force conducting a routine exercise more than 100 miles off shore in the Gulf of Sidra. None of the Americans in the two-man F-14s was hurt in the incident. One Libyan pilot was seen parachuting from his stricken plane. The Libyans disputed the U.S. account, claiming their planes were on routine surveillance missions. Libya has claimed the gulf as its territory since 1973, but the United States does not recognize the claim. 
So, in my judgment, the speculation has been excessive, but let me emphasize we do not comment on military contingencies. Q. Mr. Secretary, could you clarify _ Q. Mr. Secretary, let me follow up. That was triggered by _ that was triggered by President Reagan's own statement that he was considering a military option. Carlucci: I don't think that's what the president said if you go back and look at his actual statement. But, in any event, the reports I'm referring to are reports that you all have been putting out from the Pentagon. Q. Mr. Secretary _ Q. Do you have any indication _ Q. Mr. Secretary, were the planes capable of making an attack on the so-called weapons _ or chemical weapons plant? Were those F-14s _ Carlucci: If you were going to make an attack on the chemical plant, you would not position your carrier some 600 miles away. I think that's self-evident. Q. Mr. Secretary _ Crowe: Nor used F-14 aircraft. Q. Mr. Secretary _ Q. Was there any indication that the planes were going to fire? That the MiGs were going to fire? Carlucci: I've indicated that, by their maneuvers, they were clearly acting in a hostile fashion. Q. Did they paint with their radar? Q. Did we have a radar _ Q. Did they lock on with the radar? Crowe: Once again, let me emphasize the point, we have some preliminary information that radars were turned on. We do not know the nature of the radars. We do not _ until we debrief the pilots, it is really not appropriate to get into that kind of detail. (Pentagon spokesman) Dan Howard: Mr. Secretary _ Q. Mr. Secretary, other than the MiGs, were there any other _ Howard: Let's not have a shouting match here. We have so many people who want to ask questions, why don't we do it by raising your hands and let the secretary recognize you. Q. Mr. Secretary, other than the MiGs that were shot down, were there any other Libyan forces in the area that you are aware of? Carlucci: Not that we're aware of. (Inaudible.) Q. Mr. Secretary, could you describe any plane-to-plane conversations between the Americans and the Libyans or perhaps any other conversations _ Carlucci: That's a little detail that we shouldn't get into until we've had the debriefing of the pilots. Q. Mr. Secretary _ Q. Well, we understand they were warned. Can you tell us how they were warned? Carlucci: No. I'm not aware of any warnings. Q. Mr. Secretary _ Q. Mr. Secretary, in the previous week or 10 days, had there been any report from the area of suspicious or threatening behavior by the Libyans of any kind? Carlucci: No. Not to my knowledge. Bill? Q. We had reconnaissance planes up over the past week or 10 days around the carrier. They were never challenged or threatened in any way by the Libyans until this morning? Carlucci: There have been normal challenges and this activity took place in what is called a flight information region where you do have these kind of challenges to identify aircraft. This has no legal standing. It's an ICAO regulation, but these kinds of challenges are normal. We do it ourselves. That has nothing to do with carrier training operations. Q. What you're saying is, if the Libyans had behaved the way they behaved this morning a week or two weeks or three weeks ago, we would have shot them down then, too? 
Disaster-stricken Lockerbie embraced the bereaved of Flight 103 in a simple, tearful church service Wednesday at which a minister strongly denounced any thought of vengeance. ``Justice, yes. Retaliation, no,'' the Right Rev. James Whyte, moderator of the Church of Scotland, said in a sermon to a church packed with relatives, Pan Am employees, townspeople and dignitaries, including Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. The service in the 91-year-old sandstone church came two weeks after a bomb blew the jumbo jet with its 259 people aboard out of the sky and bombarded the little town of Lockerbie with flaming wreckage that killed 11 residents. Whyte echoed Mrs. Thatcher's public warnings against any reprisals. ``We may be tempted, indeed urged by some, to flex our muscles in response, to show that we are men,'' Whyte said from the marble pulpit of Dryfesdale Parish Church. ``To show that we are what? To show that we are prepared to let more young and more innocent die, to let more rescue workers labor in more wreckage to find the grisly proof, not of our virility, but of our inhumanity. ``That's what retaliation means. I, for one, will have none of it, and I hope you will not either.'' The bombing was ``an act of human wicritish Commonwealth; the Most Rev. Edward Luscombe, primate of the Scottish Episcopal Church; and the Most Rev. Thomas Winning, the Roman Catholic archbishop of Glasgow. For the first time since the crash, Lockerbie's daytime skies were empty of the helicopters that have led the search for wreckage and bodies over 150 square miles of countryside. Police say 126 of the 242 bodies recovered from the crash have been released to relatives, but while the search will continue, authorities say they see little hope of ever finding the missing bodies of 20 passengers and eight residents. Only three of the town's victims have been identified, and the first, 10-year-old Joanne Flannigan, will be buried in Lockerbie on Thursday. Her parents perished too, and their bodies have yet to be identified. 
Ronald Lauder, a millionaire Republican and former U.S. ambassador to Austria, said today he will run for mayor of New York City this year. The son of cosmetics magnate Estee Lauder is expected to face Democrat Edward Koch, who has indicated he will seek a fourth term in heavily Democratic New York. Lauder said in a statement that he will ``do everything in my power to bring responsive, responsible government back to the people of New York City.'' Lauder, 44, is on the Forbes magazine list of the 400 richest Americans, with a fortune estimated at $333 million. He is a former treasurer of the state GOP committee. 
Carlucci: Any time an aircraft demonstrates clear hostile intent _ and on the basis of our preliminary information, this is certainly the case here _ our aircraft are entitled under the rules of engagement to defend themselves. Q. Mr. Secretary, what happened after this incident? Was there any scrambling of Libyan jets? Any Libyan activities that followed this incident? Carlucci: Other than the SAR operation _ search and rescue operation _ I have no indications of any other Libyan activity. Q. Mr. Secretary, could you clarify? Earlier you said that you consider the case closed. Does that mean that we're back to ``business as usual,'' there's no extra alerts, there's no further military action under way, just go back to where you were? Carlucci: That is correct. We will continue with our training operations, and the carrier will continue its course into port. Q. No special alerts have been issued? Carlucci: No special alerts. Q. Just to clarify, Mr. Secretary _ Q. Mr. Secretary, the Navy is saying _ excuse me _ that the planes were warned in English to break off. Are you saying that there was no such warning, or you're just _ Carlucci: I know of no warning. Once again, we will debrief the pilots, but at this point, we know of no warnings. Q. Mr. Secretary, you said the _ can I just go ahead? I can't raise my hand here because I'm in front of the TV people. Carlucci: Yes, go ahead. (Laughter.) Q. You said that the Kennedy had arrived in the area around Christmastime, and had begun training operations at that point, is that correct? Carlucci: Admiral Crowe said that. Crowe: It arrived in the area. It had been in port over the holidays and then left port to go to the eastern Mediterranean. Q. When was the last time, sir, prior to that, that it had conducted training operations in this region? Crowe: I don't know about the Kennedy, but we were in this specific area in October. Q. Mr. Secretary _ Carlucci: We've conducted training operations in this area routinely. (To staff) _ I think, Barney, what is it? Some 12 times? Staff: Twelve times during the last year and prior to Oct. 18 in that specific area. Q. Mr. Secretary, I wonder if you could compare the normal challenges that you said occur in this area compared with what happened today and why this was perceived to be hostile action as opposed to what normally occurs? Carlucci: Well, any pilot can determine the difference. It depends on the maneuvers that the aircraft take. If you fly out and simply ask an aircraft to identify itself, that's one thing. If you're coming directly at an aircraft, accelerating in speed, and you _ when the aircraft maneuvers to get out of your way, you reposition yourself so that you are basically in a firing position, then the hostile intent is clear. But let me emphasize the point again, until we have debriefed the pilots, we cannot present you with all the details. Q. But did the F-14 _ Q. When do you expect that to take place? Carlucci: The pilots are en route to Naples right now. Q. Mr. Secretary, you said that their _ our F-14s reduced altitude and changed their headings, and the MiGs positioned themselves back on their head. The normal firing position in the gulf _ preferred gulf firing position _ is behind. Did we change altitude to get the same altitude as the MiGs? And would we not _ could they not have considered our changing altitude a maneuver to get on their tail? Carlucci: No. Based on _ once again, based on the information we have today, there is no way that the Libyans could have interpreted our evasive maneuvers as hostile intent. Q. Were the MiGs lower than us? Did we reduce our altitude to get to the same altitude of those, or get below? Carlucci: Actually, they went below the MiGs. Q. You said this had no connection to the chemical weapons plant. But didn't that dispute over the chemical weapons plant create heightened tensions? And did that in some way contribute to what happened? Carlucci: We have expressed our grave concern over the chemical weapons plant. There is a conference convening in Paris on Jan. 7 to deal with the worldwide issue of chemical weapons. We are exploring this subject within the context of that conference. We will, of course, at that conference express our concerns about the Libyan facility. But there is no way in which our military _ routine military training _ can contribute to heightened tensions in the area. Q. Do you think this incident will have any impact on this whole dispute about the chemical weapons plant? Carlucci: I indicated that we consider the incident closed. Q. Mr. Secretary, do you _ Howard: Ladies and gentlemen, I think we've exhausted the imformation available to us. Thank you very much, Mr. Secretary. Carlucci: Thank you. 
Britain today announced its agreement to the Soviet Union playing host to a human rights conference in 1991, paving the way for a speedy start to new East-West talks on cutting conventional forces in Europe. A Foreign Office statement said Britain's turnabout followed substantial improvement in the Soviet human rights record. Sources in Washington said Tuesday that President Reagan also has decided to approve holding the conference in Moscow. The Foreign Office said British agreement in principle hinged on the Soviet Union establishing effective guarantees of freedom of speech, religion and emigration by 1991. Britain and the United States had taken the toughest line on Moscow's ambition to host the conference, and today's announcement opened the way to wrapping up 35-nation talks between East and West in Vienna, due to end this month. The ending of the current Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe talks in Vienna is a prerequisite for starting new East-West negotiations on reducing conventional weapons and troops in Europe. The Foreign Office statement cited a string of improvements in the Soviet Union's human rights record including, it said, allowing Jews and others to emigrate, freeing political prisoners and ending the jamming of Western broadcasts. It said that Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, in an address to the United Nations last month, had promised to reform the Soviet criminal code and include human rights in new legislation. ``This is a substantial improvement in Soviet human rights' performance which we welcome,'' said the Foreign Office statement. ``Nonetheless much remains to be done and we shall continue to monitor the reforms carefully between now and 1991.'' The British statement said that by 1991 ``we shall expect to see:'' _Implementation of Gorbachev's promised changes in the criminal code; _Effective guarantees for freedom of religion, speech and emigration; _An end to the imprisonment of people for their political or religious beliefs or their incarceration in psychiatric hospitals; _That all long-term ``refuseniks'' are allowed to emigrate. It added that the Moscow conference should be held under the same conditions as other Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe talks held in the West. The conference needed approval of all 35 member-states, and Britain and the United States took the lead in setting conditions for Moscow, which wants the conference to set the seal on Gorbachev's reformist policy. Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze stunned participants when the Vienna talks opened in 1986 by proposing a human rights conference in Moscow. Senior officials of the British Conservative government described the proposal as outlandish and one top policy-maker likened it to ``holding a whiskey distillers' convention in Riyadh,'' capital of teetotaling Saudi Arabia. But since then Western countries have acknowledged changes or promises of change by Gorbachev. Austria, as host of the talks in Vienna, has invited the participating nations to attend a three-day closing meeting Jan. 17. The new Conventional Stability Talks on arms and troop reductions are due to be held between the 16 NATO countries and the seven members of the Communist-led Warsaw Pact military alliance. The mandate for the talks is scheduled to be part of the final accord of the Vienna meeting. The new conventional arms talks will replace the unsuccessful Mutual and Balanced Force Reduction talks on reducing forces in central Europe, which started in Vienna in 1973 and produced no results. 
Solidarity leader Lech Walesa, interviewed by the Communist Party weekly Polityka for the first time since martial law was imposed, predicted authorities will have to reinstate his union one way or the other. The 400,000-circulation newspaper published the full-page interview in its Jan. 7 edition, which sold out quickly at one busy newsstand when it became available Wednesday. The appearance of the interview in the influential weekly, formerly edited by Prime Minister Mieczyslaw F. Rakowski and often used to convey official party positions, was a further hint that authorities have accepted Walesa as a partner for discussions and are reconsidering the ban on Solidarity since 1982. Under the headline, ``That's Why We Must Come to An Agreement,'' the interview presented Walesa defending the right of Solidarity to exist. The state-run PAP news agency also carried excerpts of the interview, indicating they likely would appear in official newspapers Thursday. ``The authorities will grant the union, whether they want to or not,'' Walesa said, pointing to simmering public frustrations. ``Only will it be by force or without, and what will be the costs?'' The publication came one day after government spokesman Jerzy Urban made clear that authorities are ready to begin talks on the chief opposition demand: the restoration of the legal status of Solidarity seven years after it was suppressed in a martial-law crackdown. Walesa has declined to enter the talks, saying he first wants confirmation of official willingness to legalize Solidarity. The government says the talks should start with no preconditions. ``Legalization of Solidarity is the key issue,'' Walesa said in the interview. ``I repeat: We do not want to overthrow the authorities. A compromise is in our common interest. ... The interest of Poland is the order of the day. This is the supreme cause. That's why we must come to agreement with each other.'' Walesa also indicated that if legalized, the union would strive for moderation. ``We agree there cannot be constant strikes, struggle, any attempts at taking over power. We can guard against this. However we shall not allow ourselves to be divided, to be left without guarantees that we can maintain our independence,'' he said. Although the interviewers pressed Walesa on what guarantees he could offer authorities, Walesa refused to be specific, saying that he could only discuss such guarantees in private with authorities. But he said he understood officials' concerns. ``I understand the fears on both sides. How could one help it?'' Marian Turski, who conducted the interview for Polityka with fellow political journalist Jerzy Baczynski, said Wednesday the idea for the interview came up at a Dec. 13 newspaper editorial meeting. Walesa was telephoned 30 minutes later and agreed to the suggestion immediately, Turski said. The main part of the interview was conducted Dec. 14 at St. Brygida's Church in Gdansk, but Walesa added some comments after a Communist Party plenum Dec. 20-21, Turski said. ``We came to the conclusion that (through the interview) we could accelerate certain things, as far as achieving national consensus,'' said Turski. ``And that is, among other things, the role of our paper.'' In its 31-year history, Polityka has served the top party leadership as a sounding board for controversial ideas and a way to prepare the ground for major decisions or to define the limits of acceptable comment. The paper first interviewed Walesa shortly after the August 1980 Gdansk shipyard strike agreement that marked the beginning of Solidarity. The recent interview came out between two sessions of a Communist Party plenum at which Central Committee members have been asked to reconsider the issue of Solidarity. The second part of the plenum is expected as early as next week. If the party indicates that it will make Solidarity legal again, Walesa has said he would start negotiations with the government at long-delayed talks on how the union would be restored and other problems facing Poland. The talks were proposed by the government during a wave of strikes in August. It was not the first interview of Walesa since martial law. The weekly Konfrontacje broke the unofficial ban on Walesa in the official press with an interview published in September. Walesa also appeared uncensored on nationwide television Nov. 30 in a debate with official unions' chief Alfred Miodowicz, which authorities said was one of the most-watched TV shows in Polish history. 
U.S. Navy planes today shot down two Libyan jet fighters over the Mediterranean Sea after the American aircraft were ``threatened while conducting routine operations in international airspace,'' administration officials said. Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci emphatically denied that the two American F-14s and their host aircraft carrier, the USS John F. Kennedy, were in the area with the intention of attacking a Libyan chemical weapons factory. ``The 6th Fleet operation had no connection whatsoever with Libya's newly constructed chemical facility. These operations were conducted over 600 miles northeast'' of the facility,'' Carlucci said at a Pentagon news briefing. ``We now consider this matter closed,'' he said. The air battle was the first fighting between the United States and Libya since American jets bombed Tripoli in 1986 and came amid rising tension between the two countries over Libya's construction of the plant. At the State Department, spokesman Charles Redman also said there was no link between the plant and the warplane incident. ``There is absolutely no connection to any other story or concern you may have,'' he said. ``It may be ironic, but the two things are not related.'' Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi called the downing of his jets an act of increased ``American terrorism,'' and vowed to ``meet challenge with challenge,'' the official Libyan news agency JANA said. The American force ``posed no threat to Libya'' and the fighters were operating under ``normal peacetime rules of engagement,'' Carlucci said, referring to the guidelines on when U.S. servicemen can open fire on forces that are thought hostile. The commander of the F-14 patrol made the decision to fire at the Libyan aircraft ``in self-defense,'' and apparently shot down both planes, said Carlucci. The four crewmen of the two planes were being flown to a U.S. base at Naples, Italy, for debriefing, he said. ``At the time of the incident, both the ship and its aircraft were conducting training operations'' between the Greek island of Crete and Libya, he said. ``The aircraft carrier was 127 miles north of Tobruk, Libya'' and the F-14s ``were providing combat air patrol 50 miles south of the Kennedy, which is some 70 miles north of the northeast Libyan coast,'' he said. Carlucci said the F-14s descended from 15,000 to 4,000 feet in altitude and attempted five seperate evasive maneuvers. ``They changed speeds, altitude and direction,'' he said. ``The Libyan aircraft continued to close in a hostile manner,'' he said. ``Each time, the Libyan aircraft sought to put their nose on our aircraft. They also accelerated, so the hostile intent seems to be fairly clear,'' he said. ``At about 14 miles, the U.S. section leader decided that his aircraft was in jeopardy and he could wait no longer. One MiG-23 was shot down with a Sparrow missile. The second MiG was shot down by a Sidewinder missile at six miles,'' he said. Afterwards, he said, ``two parachutes were sighted and a Libyan search and rescue helicopter was later detected headed for the area.'' It was not clear whether the Libyan pilots survived. The confrontation occurred about noon local time, or 5 a.m. EST. The two MiG-23s were spotted by radar taking off from the Al Bumbah airfield in eastern Libya, climbing to 9,000 feet and then accelerating and closing in on the F-14s, which were at 15,000 feet, officials said. Officials said there were no indications that the Libyans fired before the two American jets downed them. Sen. Sam Nunn, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, said, ``Indications are that Libya violated what we call the rules of engagement ... They maneuvered themselves into a position to be able to shoot down American planes. The rules of engagement permit self-defense in those circumstances.'' ``Under those circumstances, ... clearly it was Libya that took the provocative action,'' Nunn, D-Ga., told Atlanta radio station WGST. ``Gadhafi never learns,'' said Senate Republican leader Bob Dole of Kansas. ``Maybe this time he will finally get it straight. Whenever he threatens American forces, we will defend ourselves.'' In Rome, Libya's ambassador to Italy, Abdel Rahman Shalgam, called today's incident ``a unilateral act'' and a ``dangerous'' action. He declined to say how Libya would respond. The Libyan Foreign Ministry said that as ``Libyan reconnaissance aircraft were carrying out a patrol over international waters, U.S. aircraft carried out a premeditated attack on them and shot them down.' The JANA news agency said the Foreign Ministry also ordered its United Nations representative to ``present an urgent complaint to the Security Council concerning the aggression perpetrated by the U.S.A. against two Libyan reconnaissance planes ... and to demand the holding of an urgent Security Council meeting on this subject.'' President Reagan, vacationing at his new home in Los Angeles, was awakened and informed of the aerial confrontation about an hour after it occurred, deputy White House Press Secretary Roman Popadiuk said. He said national security adviser Colin L. Powell telephoned the president after speaking with White House chief of staff Kenneth Duberstein about the incident. The awakening of Reagan contrasted with an incident in August 1981 in which White House aides ran into criticism for not awakening the president after a similar encounter between U.S. and Libyan jets. President-elect Bush also was told of the incident by telephone at 6 a.m. EST and was bring kept informed of developments, spokeswoman Sheila Tate said. Popadiuk said the U.S. fighters ``were threatened while conducting routine operations in international airspace north of Tobruk.'' ``We will continue with our training operation,'' he said. ``There is no indication of any further Libyan movements outside of the search and rescue operation. There was no change in the rules of engagement. I wish to stress that our aircraft were on a routine training operation and posed no threat to Libya.'' The incident came amid rising tensions and concern over what the United States says is a newly constructed plant to make chemical weapons about 35 miles southwest of the Libyan capital, Tripoli. On Tuesday, U.S. officials said for the first time they had evidence the plant had started producing limited quantities of chemical weapons and has conducted trial runs of its production equipment. Libya has claimed the plant will make pharmaceuticals and offered to let international experts inspect the plant. The United States claimed the offer was inadequate. Gadhafi has claimed that the United States is using the allegations as a pretext to attack his North African country. Reagan pointedly refused to rule out a military strike at the plant, and the United States was scheduled to discuss the plant at an international conference in Paris beginning Saturday. The president told an interviewer last month that a military attack on the plant had been discussed, but added: ``That is a decision that has not been made yet.'' The movement of a U.S. carrier group headed by the USS Theodore Roosevelt toward the Mediterranean last week had prompted speculation of an impending strike against Libya. The Pentagon described it as ``a standard deployment'' and rotation of duty with the Kennedy carrier group. 
The World Bank is raising interest rates for more prosperous Third World countries to 7.65 percent annually, the first such increase since the bank began lending at variable rates in 1982, officials said Wednesday. The rate will apply during the first six months of this year on $37 billion worth of loans to about 70 countries, said Sheldon Rappaport, a spokesman for the bank. For the second half of 1988, the rate was 7.59 percent. The increase amounts to only 0.06 percent but will cost the borrowers an additional $11 million, Rappaport estimated. The rate is based on the cost of the bank's own borrowings and will be recalculated in mid-1989. The bank gets most of its funds from borrowing on world markets. The bank is owned by 151 governmwents, with the United States holding the largest block of shares, and is the biggest single source of aid to Third World countries to help raise their living standards. It lends more than $19 billion a year. When it introduced variable interest rates on most of its loans in July 1982, the annual rate was 11.43 percent. Since then, the rate has been reduced each time it was recalculated, twice a year. The poorest countries, which borrow from the bank's International Development Association, will continue to get loans for 40 years at less than 1 percent a year, with long grace periods during which only interest is due. 
President Reagan will deliver a farewell address over television from the Oval Office at 9 p.m. EST on Jan. 11, the White House said today. Plans for such a speech had been previously announced and White House officials had said the Jan. 11 date was likely. The speech will take place nine days before Reagan is succeeded as president by Vice President George Bush. 
Vice President George Bush declared himself winner of the 1988 presidential election today in a quaint, Constitutional ceremony certifying the ballot-box triumph he gained last November. ``This announcement shall be deemed a sufficient declaration of the persons elected president and vice president of the United States,'' Bush said after reading the results of the Electoral College ballots. He immediately shook hands with House Speaker Jim Wright and grinned as members of the House and Senate accorded him a standing ovation. Bush's pronouncement of his election and that of Vice President-elect Dan Quayle before a joint session of Congress capped a carefully choreographed bit of stagecraft as old as the Republic. The final tally gave Bush 426 votes. Democrat Michael Dukakis received 111 and Democratic vice presidential running mate Lloyd Bentsen received one. That comported almost exactly with the results of the election, with the exception of one West Virginia elector, Margarette Leach of West Virginia, who cast her vote for Bentsen instead of Dukakis. Quayle did not attend the vote-counting ceremony, his office said, because he had no official role and thought it more important to work on private meetings concerning hiring his staff and plans for the Jan. 20 Inauguration. ``He didn't want to go. It would have just been a photo op,'' said press secretary Dave Beckwith, adding that Quayle's staff had discussed the matter with the Bush staff. Since Quayle is no longer a senator _ his successor was sworn in Tuesday _ and not yet the vice president, there was no need for him to be there, Beckwith said. The outcome was utterly lacking in suspense, yet it was an event that has not occurred in precisely these circumstances since the days of Martin Van Buren. The Constitution requires that the vice president preside over the ceremony, and as Bush occasionally points out, Van Buren was the last vice president to win election directly to the White House. Thus he was the last man who presided over the ceremony that certified his own triumph _ in 1837. Bush was greeted by applause when he led a parade of senators into the House chamber for the ceremony. Two pages carried the Electoral College votes cast by the states into the House in two mahogany boxes. The vice president then mounted the Speaker's rostrum of the House chamber for the ceremony. Four lawmakers opened and pronounced the Electoral College results from each of the 50 states and the District of Columbia ``regular in form and authentic'' and announed the results. If there was no suspense, Bush injected a note of humor. When Rep. Frank Annunzio, D-Ill., simply said that Arkansas had cast six votes for president, Bush interrupted and said, ``The chair wonders who won that one.'' Bush did, along with 39 other states and the right to the White House. At the same time Bush savors his presidential election victory, aides say he is close to making the final appointment to his Cabinet, that of energy secretary. James Schlesinger, who served in the post during the Carter administration, remains the leading candidate, according to one Republican source. Bush also is expected to appoint a drug czar within the next few days. He met privately Tuesday with Sen. Dennis DeConcini, D-Ariz., and the Arizona Republic reported that DeConcini is a top contender for that job. DeConcini would not discuss specifics of the meeting. High-level appointments aside, Bush's trip to the Capitol for the Electoral College ceremony closed the circle on the election of 1988. Bush was in the Capitol on Tuesday, as well, presiding over swearing-in ceremonies for 33 new and newly re-elected senators. He took time out long enough to renew ``loud and clear'' his campaign pledge to oppose higher taxes. ``It's funny, I've talked to about 33 new senators and not one of them has said that to me,'' Bush said when asked if a possible tax ncrease had been discussed. He said of his campaign pledge, ``The American people have heard it loud and clear.'' Despite Bush's comments, many Democrats and some Republicans believe he will have to change his mind to win agreement on a comprehensive plan to reduce the federal budget deficit. Bush performed the senatorial swearing in chores twice, first in a formal ceremony on the Senate floor, administering the oath of office to senators in groups of four. He then did it one by one in a hall where photographers were permitted. The president-elect jokingly told reporters he was ``going to make a little news up here for you guys.'' But when he was asked whether he intends to fight a subpoena to testify in the Iran-Contra trial of former White House aide Oliver North, Bush retorted: ``I don't want to make that much news.'' 
President Reagan has decided to support a schedule of three human rights conferences, including a 1991 session in Moscow, the White House announced today. Deputy Press Secretary Roman Popadiuk said Reagan has authorized the U.S. delegation in Vienna to support the three-conference plan, ``in cooperation with like-minded allies'' to encourage continued progress on human rights in the Soviet Union. The conferences are scheduled to take place in Paris in 1989, Copenhagen in 1990 and Moscow in 1991, he said. A White House statement noted significant progress on Soviet human rights in the past three years, including release of hundreds of political prisoners and an end to jamming of Voice of America, Radio Liberty and other Western broadcasts. But Popadiuk added, ``The president recognizes that there is much yet to be done in the Soviet Union before that nation meets acceptable and universal human rights standards.'' U.S. agreement to participate in the conference signals American support for Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev's internal reforms and sets the stage for the opening of new East-West negotiations on cutting troops and arms in Europe. The human rights conference and the European arms negotiations are linked, and Secretary of State George P. Shultz has recommended they proceed based on Soviet advances in human rights, a U.S. official had told The Associated Press on Tuesday. Reagan, on vacation in California, decided Tuesday to accept Shultz's advice, said another official, who also spoke on condition he not be identified. Shultz on Sunday is to meet with Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze in Paris, where they will be attending a conference of more than 100 nations on ways to halt the proliferation of chemical weapons. The start of conventional arm reduction talks between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Warsaw Pact has been awaiting completion of a 35-nation review in Vienna of human rights in the Soviet Union and in Eastern Europe. Evidently, Reagan has seen enough progress in the Soviet record to close the conference in Vienna and move on. ``It's not a perfect scorecard, but they've done a lot,'' said one U.S. official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. ``They've come amazingly far.'' The State Department last Friday credited the Soviets with ``significant progress'' in its treatment of political prisoners and Jewish citizens who are refused permission to emigrate. The Soviets have released more than 600 political prisoners in the last two years, including all the monitors of the 1975 Helsinki agreement, which held out the promise of an improvement in the human rights situation, Phyllis Oakley, the State Department spokeswoman, said last Friday. All prisoners charged with violating political or religious constraints are now free, and less than a dozen of 120 cases of Soviet citizens denied permission to join family members abroad remain unresolved, Mrs. Oakley said. Jamming of U.S.-sponsored radio broadcasts has ceased and Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev in his speech Dec. 7 to the U.N. General Assembly pledged that laws bearing on human rights would be changed, she said. ``They have made significant progress,'' Mrs. Oakley said. ``I think that's clear from the examples I've given.'' Meanwhile, the National Conference on Soviet Jewry reported on Monday that 3,652 Jews left the Soviet Union in December, the highest monthly total since December 1979. The exodus for 1988 totaled 19,287, the highest for any year since 1980 when 21,471 Jews left. Shoshana S. Cardin, chairman of the conference, said ``we welcome the marked increase in Jewish emigration in 1988. However, we had hoped that the 2,696 refuseniks remaining in the Soviet Union would have been granted permission, in a true expression of glasnost (openness). Let us hope that the trend toward increased emigration will continue in 1989, and that all remaining refuseniks will be included.'' Jewish emigration is one of the yardsticks used by the United States to measure Soviet performance on human rights. The Soviets recently turned over to the State Department a list of about 50 refuseniks, mostly from the Leningrad area, that were to be given exit permits. This was one of the moves that prompted Shultz to recommend U.S. approval of a Soviet proposal for holding an international human rights conference in Moscow. Soviet imprisonment of about 30 citizens on criminal charges is another problem that, from the U.S. view, appears to be easing. The State Department suspects political motives for some of those imprisonments. The Soviets have proposed a ``negotiating forum'' in which U.S. officials would have access to court records and could present their concerns that some prisoners may be the victims of ``trumped-up charges,'' the official said. Gorbachev has been eager to host a human rights conference in Moscow to demonstrate the reforms he has undertaken. It is intended as a review of the 1975 Helsinki agreement, which was signed by the United States, the Soviet Union, Canada and 32 European countries. Reviews are due to be held in Paris this year and in Copenhagen in 1990. In order to gain what Moscow took to be Western acceptance of the post-World War II borders of Eastern Europe, the Soviets in 1975 agreed to accelerate the exchange of democratic ideas across the East-West divide. Ever since, the United States and its allies have used the Helsinki accord to pressure Moscow to improve human rights conditions. 
A university president in Nanking appealed Wednesday for African students to return to the campus where a fight with Chinese touched off racial hostility that has spread to at least four cities. In Beijing, the nearly 500 African students at the Beijing Languages Institute boycotted classes Wednesday, a day after Chinese demonstrated against an alleged attack by a black student on a Chinese woman. ``Brothers, let us unite and fight for dignity,'' said a leaflet distributed by Africans at the institute. ``Black is beauty.'' In Wuhan, an industrial city in central China, about 300 Chinese students threw rocks at the African students' dormitory, allegedly beat up a Sri Lankan student and put up posters saying ``Black Devils Go Home'' in a disturbance Saturday at the Central China Polytechnical College, foreigners said Wednesday. In the eastern city of Hangzhou, about 50 Africans were in their second week of boycotting classes over what they say was an attempt by university authorities to isolate them by saying they had AIDS. Liang Ruiju, head of Hehai University in Nanking, said he hoped for the prompt return of about 40 Africans who have been isolated at a guest house outside the eastern Chinese city for nine days. ``We have made full preparations to welcome foreign students to return to school to study,'' Liang was quoted by the official Xinhua News Agency as saying. He said there are a ``small number of African students who do not study hard, behave poorly and often fight and make trouble.'' But he said, ``Hehai University has treated students from all countries equally and never discriminated against African students.'' The 40 African students _ city officials put the number at more than 50 _ reportedly refuse to return to the campus out of fear for their safety. They were among about 140 mostly African students who were forced to the guest house after police blocked their attempt to board trains for Beijing. They were fleeing thousands of Chinese youths who ransacked their dormitory and staged street rallies demanding punishment for Africans involved in a Dec. 24 fight in which 11 Chinese and two Africans were injured. A student from Ghana was arrested Saturday in a confrontation at the guest house in which Africans claim police beat and tortured them with electric batons. Three other students have been detained for questioning. A diplomat from the Ghana Embassy in Beijing said on Wednesday that the Foreign Ministry had ``denied everything'' related to police brutality. Minister-Counsellor Y.N. Ohene-Akrasi said a group of about nine African diplomats, who met with the Africans in Nanking last week, planned to return on Friday to confer with the students. Ohene-Akrasi said the outbreak of racial strife in other Chinese cities ``gives us concern. We are following these events very keenly.'' The two foreigners who described the disturbance Saturday at the Central China Polytechnical College in Wuhan _ a student from Gabon and an American teacher _ said school authorities took the college's 12 African students on a trip to the countryside on Sunday and they have yet to return. The student and teacher spoke on condition of anonymity. The Gabonese student said Chinese students at the college wrote a letter to the school director saying they didn't want Africans at the school because they were ``polluting Chinese society with their relations with Chinese women.'' In the city of Hangzhou, an African student at the Zhejiang Agricultural College said the Africans boycotting classes in the AIDS protest met school officials Wednesday who promised to give them a written statement saying the university had no official policy of discrimination against Africans. The student, Vincent Ongas, of Kenya, said that once the statement is received the Africans would consider whether to end the boycott. ``It was a tough meeting. As you know, we're not quite a happy group in China,'' he said. The Chinese side denies all charges of racial prejudice and expresses pride at its long-established policy of showing solidarity with the Third World by giving scholarships to African students. There are about 1,500 African students from 40 nations now in China. However, Africans say they are subject to racial discrimination, and social contacts between African men and Chinese women are a frequent source of tension. Chinese also resent that Africans, many from countries as poor as China, receive far better food and lodging than Chinese students. 
Excerpts from the interview with Solidarity leader Lech Walesa published in the Jan. 7 edition of the Communist Party weekly Polityka: 
The government can say that ``Solidarity'' means the struggle against the authorities or the threat of anarchy. And it is right. Somebody else will say that it is the struggle for reform. And he is also right. For me it is the struggle for making the authorities undertake reforms, carried on at various places, not en masse as it once used to be but through various associations, clubs, economic movements and its main, unionist stream. 
The international situation is much better now. Important transformations are taking place in other countries, especially in the Soviet Union. I talked about this with Professor Andrei Sakharov in Paris. They also understand in Moscow that it is necessary to depart from the Stalinist system, to break with it. The totalitarian structure must be replaced by pluralism. We also could hear a similar opinion voiced from the highest rostrum in Poland recently. This raises our hopes that reformatory forces will prevail in the governing camp. Solidarity keeps repeating that it is ready to sign an anti-crisis pact in favor of reform. 
The authorities have seen that without agreement nothing can be done in the country. And society has also learned that without the authorities one cannot go far. 
I state once again: In this country agreement is necessary. The legalization of Solidarity is the key matter. There is nothing to be afraid of. I repeat _ we do not want to overthrow the authorities. Compromise lies in our common interest. Together we have to do something for Poland. The interest of Poland is the order of the day. This is the supreme matter and this is why we must reach agreement. 
You are saying that there is at threat of destabilization if the authorities legalize the union. The authorities shall grant the union, whether they want to or not. Only will it be by force, or without, and what will be the costs? For me this is the question. And tanks won't help here, because they did not once already. ... Poland needs quick agreement. 
Guarantees? I reassure: We are not a threat to this authority, this apparatus. We don't have any other party or group which could take over power. And the party has lots of time to situate itself on this evolutionary path. However it is threatened by a revolutionary path. And that's why, if it does not come to terms with us, if we together don't find a place for it (the party) and for us, then this would be dangerous. Both for the party and maybe for us as well. It is better to come to terms now, peacefully, rather than after fighting. There is more to be gained. And it will be easier for the party to rule when it is clearly aware of its place. In Poland there must be place for everybody. The sooner the party comes to terms with us, the better. A new solution by force? We don't want to become Afghanistan. I will say what I said in 1981: Let's meet on the road to reforms, because there is no other way out. 
I evaluate this meeting (TV debate Nov. 30 with the head of the official union federation Alfred Miodowicz) very well, but not from the point of view of a battle or victory. It must result in something. The stagnation which has existed in Poland must end since we all are losing because of it. ... This debate was like a breeze in our inertia _ we have caught some wind in our sails. 
``Coming to America'' may be going to court. A Memphis man, Laurence Armour, has filed a $40 million lawsuit against entertainer Eddie Murphy, claiming the comedian stole the plot for the hit movie from Armour's screenplay, ``The Cannibal.'' Armour, 41, joins at least two others _ columnist Art Buchwald and writer Shelby Gregory _ who claim the movie plot was taken from their work. Armour said he sent the idea to comedian Richard Pryor in 1986. Pryor and Murphy are pals, and both work for Paramount Pictures, he said. ``Coming to America'' stars Murphy as an African prince who comes to the United States to seek a bride who will love him for what he is, not for what he owns. Armour said his screenplay begins the same way, with an African prince who comes to America. But in his script, the prince becomes a cannibal after finding he likes the taste of flesh while sucking venom from a snakebite. Armour's federal court lawsuit alleges that there are 20 substantial similarities between his script outline, a newspaper clipping he sent along with it, and the movie. Buchwald told People magazine in August the movie was based on a story he sold to Paramount titled ``It's a Crude, Crude World.'' Buchwald hasn't filed a lawsuit, but Gregory has sued for $10 million, claiming the movie was based on his script, ``Toto, the African Prince.'' S. Russell Headrick, a lawyer who has been retained to represent Pryor, Murphy and Paramount in Memphis, said he is preparing a response to Armour's lawsuit. He declined further comment. 
A man who helped rescue George Bush from the Pacific Ocean more than 44 years ago is recuperating from back surgery and will have to skip the president-elect's inauguration Jan. 20. ``It's a $32 million party and I can't go,'' Dan Moody lamented Tuesday. Moody, 71, said he received an invitation to the inauguration but can't even ride in a car until Jan. 30. The retired electronics technician said he last saw Bush on Sept. 2, 1944, off the Bonin Islands south of Japan. Moody was a torpedoman aboard the submarine Finback. The Finback rescued the crew members of a dozen or more downed U.S. planes that day, Moody recalled. Among them was Bush, the youngest pilot in the Navy. ``He survived, but his two crewmen didn't,'' said Moody. ``We brought him aboard, dried him out and gave him hot coffee.'' The Finback returned to Pearl Harbor about four weeks later with the aviators. Bush spent the long trip to Hawaii ``censoring the mail,'' said Moody. Moody said he believed all living crew members from the submarine were invited to the inauguration. 
Gov. Norm Bangerter has been ordered to cut back on his one-on-one basketball games after undergoing arthroscopic surgery on an arthritic right knee. Bangerter, who turned 56 on Wednesday, the same day the state had its 93rd birthday, underwent the three-hour procedure Tuesday morning at the University of Utah Health Sciences Center, said hospital spokesman John Dwan. The governor checked out of the hospital later the same day. ``His leg is very stiff and sore, and it'll take a couple of days before he feels better,'' Dwan said. ``He should be ready to address the Legislature when it convenes next Monday.'' The operation, which has been planned for months, involved the removal of a small amount of bone and cartilage debris. ``It's what is called a `low-gain' procedure. This is not going to cure his condition,'' Dwan said. ``It may help him, give him a few more years of relatively painless use of his joint. ``We'll just have to wait and see if it gives him any relief,'' he added. ``The governor has been advised to cut back on his one-on-one basketball a little bit.'' One of Bangerter's first acts as governor four years ago was to install a basketball standard at the governor's mansion. 
Actor Tony Curtis, surrounded by 10 dancing girls, opened the annual post-Christmas sale at Harrods department store Wednesday morning as a jazz band played outside. ``I'm going to buy a pair of socks and some underwear here,'' said Curtis, nattily dressed in a blue pinstripe suit, black shirt and white tie. ``I have never been to a Harrods' sale before. The atmosphere is really exciting,'' he told reporters as he stood with Harrods owner Mohamed al Fayed waiting for the first rush of shoppers. Only a few thousand people were waiting at the 11 entrances to Harrods when the doors opened just before 9 a.m. and nobody spent the night waiting to be first in line, as has often happened in the past. Nonetheless, the store, in London's Knightsbridge section, was predicting record sales during the three-week sale. Among the bargains: an 18-carat gold necklace reduced from $290,000 to $145,000. 
President Reagan was awakened about an hour after Wednesday's downing of two Libyan jet fighters by U.S. Navy planes over the Mediterranean Sea, in contrast to a similar incident in 1981 when he was not told for more than six hours. White House spokesman Roman Popadiuk said that Lt. Gen. Colin L. Powell, the president's national security adviser, telephoned the president at the home in the fashionable Bel Air district of Los Angeles where Reagan will live after his term ends Jan. 20. The president and first lady Nancy Reagan have been staying at the home during most of a two-week California vacation which they will wind up on Thursday, returning to Washington for their final two weeks in the White House. Popadiuk said Powell telephoned White House Chief of Staff Kenneth M. Duberstein before informing the president of the shooting at 2:53 a.m. PST. He said he had no information on the president's reaction, except to say, ``The president . . . considers the incident closed.'' In the earlier incident in August 1981, seven months after Reagan took office, his aides were sharply criticized for allowing him to sleep after they knew of the downing of two Libyan planes. In both incidents, two Libyan aircraft were downed by U.S. F-14s. In the 1981 case, Reagan was also in Los Angeles, staying in a $750-a-day suite at the Century Plaza Hotel. At that time, he went six hours and four minutes without knowing of the shooting. Deputy White House press secretary Larry Speakes said presidential counselor Edwin Meese III and national security adviser Richard V. Allen, both in Los Angeles with the presidential party, were informed almost immediately. That incident, the first since the Vietnam War in which U.S. planes fired on foreign planes, occurred at 10:20 p.m. PDT. Meese telephoned Reagan at 4:24 a.m. PDT, Speakes said. They spoke for four or five minutes and the president went back to sleep, he added. Popadiuk said he did not know whether Reagan went back to sleep after being told of Wednesday's shooting. He also said Powell kept in touch with the president by telephone during the day, bringing him up to date on developments. In 1981, Speakes said Meese decided not to inform the president after conferring with Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger. He said Meese felt that no decisions were necessary and he wanted to await a more complete report before disturbing the president. Speakes said the president did not object to not having been awakened earlier. Others informed before the president included Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. in Santa Barbara, Calif.; Vice President George Bush in Maine; and CIA Director William Casey in Washington. Speakes said Reagan's aides decided that only two decisions were necessary and that they had been made shortly after the incident. One was whether to continue the training exercises, which the fleet commander had decided to do, and the other was whether the aircraft pilots should return fire, which they had already done. In Wednesday's case, also, officials announced that the training exercise would continue. 
A top U.S. diplomat said Tuesday the United States hopes a Paris conference on chemical weapons will expand the power of the United Nations to investigate allegations of use of the illegal arms. ``We would like chemical weapons never to be used and we would like countries like Libya not to be producing them,'' said Ambassador Herbert S. Okun, deputy permanent representative. ``Our goal will be to enhance the role of the secretary-general to investigate promptly allegations of the use of these (chemical) weapons and to report back to the international community so they can do something about it,'' said Okun, the No. 2 U.S. diplomat at the United Nations. Okun, in an interview with The Associated Press, commented on an international conference on chemical weapons starting Saturday in Paris, which will discuss what he called ``the poor countries' atomic bomb.'' The meeting was proposed last fall by President Reagan and French President Francois Mitterrand to curb the use and production of chemical weapons, and to strengthen international opposition to the arms. The weapons already are outlawed by the Geneva Protocol of 1925, but it has been violated widely by some developing nations. The conference will be attended by about 140 nations and Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar. Okun declined to discuss possible sanctions, such as a trade embargo, for confirmed use of the weapons, saying that was premature. The U.N. General Assembly and Security Council have condemned the use of chemical weapons in general and in the Iran-Iraq war. Last summer, a U.N. report cited Iraq's widespread use of the weapons, allegedly against its dissident Kurdish minority. Iraq denied it and refused access to international investigators. Sometimes, diplomats have said, political considerations have prevented the world body from promptly expressing outrage and condemnation of a particular country. Last year when the Security Council wanted to bring Iraq to the bargaining table to try to end its war with Iran, some nations were reluctant to publicly condemn Iraq, lest it refuse to talk. Okun said the U.S. goal at the conference is to heighten consciousness about the use of chemical weapons. Asked about U.S. charges that Libya is about to produce chemical weapons at a purported pesticide plant, Okun said plans for the conference preceded the Libyan situation. ``It is not directly aimed at Libya, Iraq or anbody else,'' he said. He emphasized that U.N. investigation of alleged chemical weapon use was one thing and ``the production side is another question. ``But clearly a heavily defended (Libyan) plant that is producing only `pesticides' in Libya allows us to assume the worst. We have to assume that. It's a separate issue but we take it very seriously,'' he said. Asked against whom the Libyan plant would have to be defended, Okun said he didn't know, but added: ``If their motives are not good, they probably would have to fear a lot of people.'' 
Two Sikhs convicted in the 1984 assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi are to be hanged Friday, relatives of the condemned men and a government official said Wednesday. ``Today's date is the blackest date for me, not because my father's execution date has been fixed, but because an innocent man has lost all hopes of mercy and justice,'' said Rajinder Singh, the son of one of the men. ``My father was and is innocent.'' He said his mother and brother were informed of the execution date when they visited New Delhi's Tihar Jail on Wednesday. His father, Kehar Singh, 54, and Satwant Singh, 24, have been at the prison since their arrest in November 1984. The men are not related. All Sikhs take the name Singh, which means lion in the Punjabi language. An official at the Home Ministry confirmed the hanging was scheduled Friday but said it was open to change. ``We have to wait for the Supreme Court's decision on Thursday,'' said the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. The condemned, who are not related, have filed appeals before the court that are scheduled to be heard Thursday. It is the second time their execution has been set. The Supreme Court stayed the hanging 15 hours before it was scheduled Dec. 2 after Kehar Singh's lawyers challenged the dismissal of his mercy petition to President Ramaswamy Venkataraman. Satwant Singh did not filed a mercy petition _ legally the final avenue for a person condemned to die _ but under Indian law, his death sentence was automatically delayed when Kehar Singh sought clemency. Venkataraman turned down the mercy plea Monday, clearing the way for the executions. On Thursday, the Supreme Court will hear Kehar Singh's appeal of the president's dismissal of his mercy petition. The court also will hear Satwant Singh's request that it investigate his allegations of murder against two of Mrs. Gandhi's bodyguards. Mrs. Gandhi was shot in the garden of her New Delhi residence on Oct. 31, 1984, by two Sikhs. One of them, Beant Singh, was shot and killed by two bodyguards minutes later. The other, Satwant Singh, was shot and wounded. Satwant Singh has alleged the bodyguards fired at him and Beant Singh after they were disarmed. A magistrate's court and an appeals court have already rejected his pleas to investigate the case. Kehar Singh, an uncle of Beant Singh, was convicted of conspiracy. Mrs. Gandhi's assassination was in apparent revenge for an army raid she had ordered four months previously on the Golden Temple in Amritsar, the holiest Sikh shrine, to rid the complex of Sikh militants. More than 1,200 people, most of them Sikhs, died in the raid. Sikh militants are fighting for a separate nation in Punjab state, where they are a majority. Throughout India, however, Sikhs are a minority and claim discrimination by the Hindu majority. 
Prime Minister Sadek Mahdi said Wednesday his government is in control a week after bloody riots, but predicted ``troublemakers'' would try again and hinted at a tough response. Four people were killed and scores injured in riots protesting price increases and the civil war in southern Sudan that began nearly six years ago. Mahdi said Wednesday the government was working on economic and political reforms. Severe shortages of bread and gasoline continued across the country and newspapers reported student protests in two western towns. Officials said Wednesday 130,000 tons of wheat and flour from Turkey, Saudi Arabia and the Netherlands had arrived in Port Sudan on the Red Sea and would be used to relieve the bread shortage. Bread, when available, has increased in price from the equivalent of about 1{ cents to nearly 23 cents. In an interview with The Associated Press, Mahdi blamed the riots on dramatic price increases for basic goods, which were rescinded immediately. He asserted that his 3-year-old government was in control and had the support of most Sudanese. ``I have no doubt that, if it comes to street support the government will have greater support than any combination of its enemies,'' Mahdi declared. He added, however: ``I think troublemakers will try to work up something on the streets. ... The provocative procedures, if some insist on them, will be neutralized. ... Ultimately, if it is a question of street action, I think it will be defeated.'' The prime minister conducted the interview in his downtown offices, wearing the traditional Sudanese white flowing robe and turban. Protesters stormed the offices on Dec. 29, smashing government cars and shouting for Mahdi's resignation, but police dispersed them with tear gas and water cannon before they reached the premier. Riots began after the government decreed price increases of 600 percent for sugar and 60 percent for cigarettes and a 15 percent tax on domestically manufactured goods. Wages were raised by up to 500 percent two days earlier and the government said the new revenues were intended to pay for them. ``I think the main cause of the demonstrations is the extent of the changes that have taken place without necessary preparations,'' Mahdi said, and he was discussing with trade unions how to finance the higher wages. He said revenue must be found ``and we are discussing these sources. There will be more negotiations on all fronts.'' Asked about possible peace talks with the Sudan People's Liberation Army in the south, Mahdi said he would send Defense Minister Abdul-Maguid Hamed Khalil to meet with the rebel leader, former army Col. John Garang. ``If they are interested in peace, they will have to meet with the party against whom they're fighting,'' he said. No date has been set for Khalil's departure. Garang has said he will speak only with someone who brings government endorsement of a peace proposal he signed in November with the Democratic Unionist Party, then a member of Mahdi's governing alliance. The Democratic Unionists left the coalition after Mahdi refused to accept the terms. Many political observers say he rejected the agreement to placate the fundamentalist National Islamic Front, a buffer in the Cabinet between his Umma Party and the Unionists. What the Front opposes is a provision to suspend the 1,350-year-old Islamic legal code in Sudan, which the rebels in the predominantly Christian and animist south consider a necessity. Garang's army seeks greater autonomy for the the south from the Moslem north of Africa's largest country. Mahdi said he wants peace, but ``What is under review are the unacceptable aspects of the agreement.'' Speaking of famine and disease in the south, which Western officials say killed at least 560,000 people in 1988, Mahdi said hope can be found in the food airlift being conducted by the International Committee of the Red Cross. He said the airlift, agreed upon by the government and rebels, ``has had a peaceful effect.'' Relief efforts had been stalled by rebel threats to attack convoys moving without permission, whether from the government or international organizations. The government refused to cooperate with international agencies dealing with the rebels. 
A motorist who admitted he ``was driving like a nut'' was followed home and shot by an angry driver who accused him of nearly causing a collision, police said. Eric Montgomery, 22, of Wheeling was charged Tuesday with malicious assault in the Dec. 22 incident and was being held on $15,000 bond in the Ohio County Jail, police said. The wounded man, Kent Blazier, 31, of Wheeling, suffered a gunshot wound and was released from the hospital last week. ``The guy got out of the car and said (Blazier) was speeding and nearly hit him and pulled out a gun,'' said police Sgt. Fred Schultz. ``Blazier said, `You're not going to shoot me for that, are you?' And then he shot him in the abdomen.'' Blazier said he was upset the day of the shooting because he was short of funds for a Christmas present he wanted to purchase. ``I was drunk a little bit and I was driving like a nut, and I came down a hill around a turn fast,'' he said. ``I was wrong, but I shouldn't have got shot for it,'' Blazier said. He said he was home for about five minutes when he heard a man yelling outside. He said an argument ensued and he was shot after he tried to kick the assailant in the face when he pulled out a gun. Police refused to comment on the investigation or how they found Montgomery, but Blazier said he provided authorities with a license plate number. 
Joyce Mays, former nail biter, got her first manicure 20 years ago to enhance the beauty of the big topaz ring her husband gave her. Twenty years later, Mays' fingernails are her most prized posession _ each five-inch-long, twisting, brightly painted one of them. Now she uses the nails to draw the customers from among the curious who gather at the window of the Finesse Hair Designers salon and watch her give manicures. ``People stare at my nails,'' said Mays, 43. ``When they do, it doesn't bother me. I try to get closer _ and give them one of my business cards.'' It has been three years since she cut her nails, which she paints with acrylics, changing the designs about every three weeks. To protect them, she never uses them in mundane tasks like dialing telephones. Instead, her knuckles get a lot of wear and tear. She also can't change the sheets on the bed. For that, she enlists the aid of her husband, Bill. When Pope John Paul II visited New Orleans last year, she painted a picture of the pontiff, hands clasped in prayer, on one thumbnail. On the other was a likeness of St. Louis Cathedral, blue sky in the background and a banner with the pope's name flying above it. 
There are about 35,000 babies just waiting to be born in Louisiana. Officially speaking, that is. The babies are alive and kicking as far as their parents are concerned, but they don't yet exist in state records. That's because budget cuts have caused a three-month backlog on the issuance of birth certificates in the state. ``We are waiting for the paper to come in. We expect it to come in in about a week,'' said Gwen Bach-Stewart, spokeswoman for the Department of Health and Hospitals. ``What we plan to do to get caught up is to print 6,000 to 8,000 a week to knock out the backlog.'' When cash-flow problems developed last year, the department cut in half its order of paper used in printing birth certificates, she said. ``When the supply got low, we had to order again,'' Bach-Stewart said. But state purchasing procedures are lengthy and the paper ran out. State law requires the Office of Vital Statistics to send the parents of all newborns a free birth certificate. Normally about 2,000 of the certificates are sent each week. Once the new paper supplies arrive, Vital Statistics will start sending the certificates out at an expedited rate, assigning additional workers to the job until the backlog is erased, Bach-Stewart said. ``It is going to be behind for a while. If the public bears with us we should be back to normal in a short time,'' she said. 
More than 1,000 people have flocked to a suburban firewood yard since Christmas Eve, sometimes standing vigil until dawn, to see a glowing light and what some claim to be images of the Virgin Mary or Jesus. The reported appearance of the light amid logs and stacks of bundled firewood has drawn increasingly larger crowds each night to this predominantly black community a few miles northeast of Houston. ``To me, it's a blessing,'' said Pat Reed, 46, a homemaker in Barrett Station. ``I keep coming back for more. It's the most wonderful thing that's ever happened. I think it will help draw us together to serve God more.'' The size of the crowds has prompted the Harris County Sheriff's Department to offer assistance with crowd control as cars begin stacking up at dusk and hundreds file into the site. Joseph Lemond, 75, who runs the firewood yard with his son, said he first saw the light on Christmas Eve when he went to check equipment in the yard. Photographs taken a few days later show a light radiating a brilliant blue, beige and white diamond-shaped image, but Lemond said the image is ``much clearer and more vivid when I've seen it'' than it appears in the blurred photos. After New Year's Eve, he said, the blue light faded to a golden white, in which some spectators reported seeing a vision of Jesus with a thorned crown, along with occasional glimpses of the Virgin. ``I feel the light is pretty miraculous,'' Lemond said. The light reflects off an overturned, white table lying near a shed at the back of the cluttered lot. ``Everything has been like this for five years,'' said Lemond's son, Martin. ``We've come out here at night and never seen it before.'' Last weekend, the family showed it to some neighbors and to a Roman Catholic priest, the Rev. Donald Fest. ``I saw the blue-and-white configuration,'' said Fest, who viewed the light New Year's Eve. ``It's possible that it's supernatural, but I'm not an expert. I can't explain it. I call it a curious phenomenon.'' 
A sheriff's deputy on her second night of duty was fatally shot at a jail early today by an inmate released hours earlier, authorities said. Suzanne Kays, 33, was shot several times with her own gun at the Lew Sterrett Criminal Justice Center after the rookie tried to stop 37-year-old Alfonso Seward from entering an area off limits to the public, officials said. Kays, who had been named the top graduate in her class at the training academy, was pronounced dead at Parkland Memorial Hospital. Seward was shot several times by police officers after the slaying, said Sheriff Jim Bowles. He was listed in serious condition. It was the first slaying at a Dallas jail since Jack Ruby shot Lee Harvey Oswald on Nov. 24, 1963 in the basement of the Dallas city jail, authorities said. Oswald had been arrested in the assassination of President Kennedy. Today's shooting was the first slaying of a law officer in Dallas in 1989. Five police officers were killed in 1988, the deadliest year in department history. Seward, who had been arrested five times since Nov. 9 on misdemeanor charges, had been jailed Monday for failing to pay for a restaurant meal and was released Tuesday evening, less than eight hours before the shooting. Sheriff's spokesman Jim Ewell said Seward had stayed in the lobby for a couple of hours after being freed. Bowles said the man tried to enter a secure area. ``There was an altercation and he assassinated her,'' the sheriff said. After the shooting, the man waved the deputy's pistol at clerks and a janitor and fired a shot in a corridor, Bowles said. Two police officers with shotguns demanded his surrender, but he refused and was shot in the lower body, the sheriff said. Kays was described as a model officer and had worked for the county as a detention officer since 1981. ``Any time an officer is slain, it's terrible,'' said sheriff's Lt. James Cron. ``But when it's one of her caliber, it's a real loss.'' Kays, who was single, and had served from Army from 1975 to 1979. She joined the department in 1981, starting as a detention service officer. She was the only female in the training class that graduated Thursday and was awarded a wristwatch as the top student in academics and firearms efficiency. As a detention officer, she had not been allowed to carry a weapon. Kays was the first Dallas County law enforcement officer since 1982 to die in the line of duty. Bowles said he will order a review of security at the jail. 
A farm couple who have bitterly fought foreclosure were released from jail Wednesday after being charged in an incident in which they refused to obey an eviction notice and were carried out of their home by sheriff's deputies. Herman Gennrich was charged with trespassing and his wife, Beverly Gennrich, was charged with trespassing and obstructing the legal process, both misdemeanors, said Carver County Attorney Mike Fahey. ``A condition of their release is that they not return to their farm without permission from the court,'' Fahey said. ``If they do, they'll probably be arrested again for trespassing.'' The couple were removed from their home near Cologne on Tuesday. Authorities, using trucks and trailers, then removed their belongings, machinery and livestock. Sheriff's Captain Ed Hjermstad said the Gennrichs were carried out of their house after refusing to leave and trying to ``arrest'' the deputies on trespassing charges. The deputies were carrying out a court order to foreclose on the couple's farm about 40 miles southwest of Minneapolis, Fahey said Tuesday. The couple were told to be off the 320-acre farm by Nov. 4, but they had until Dec. 31 to match the bank's offer on their property, which they failed to do, Fahey said. The Gennrichs' land was auctioned in May 1987, but the family was allowed to farm the land for one year under a grace period provision. The farm was purchased by Farm Credit Services for $405,000. The Gennrichs are to appear in court again Jan. 11, Fahey said. In June 1987, Gennrich and his son, Robert, who owns an adjoining farm, pleaded guilty to charges that they resisted attempts by authorities to repossess equipment and livestock in February of that year. Authorities said the father and son bashed a trailer and brandished firearms when creditors tried to repossess the equipment. 
The Electoral College, a 200-year-old political oddity, has once again elected a president and vice president of the United States. The electoral votes were carried by blue-coated pages into a joint session of Congress at 1 p.m. Wednesday in a pair of large, brass-bound mahogany boxes, secured with stout leather straps. The straps were unfastened, padlocks were unlocked and tellers _ two from the Senate and two from the House _ slit open the sealed manila envelopes stored inside and read the official results, state by state by state. Born of compromise in the Constitutional Convention of 1787, the Electoral College first saw service in the nation's first presidential election in 1789, deciding that the voters were right in selecting George Washington as president and John Adams as vice president. In theory, the Electoral College could have arrived at a different result entirely in 1789. And, again in theory, the outcome now could be entirely different than that called for by the voters: George Bush for president and Dan Quayle as vice president. Indeed, the result Bush announced, 426 electoral votes for Bush, 111 votes for Democrat Michael Dukakis, and one vote for Sen. Lloyd Bentsen of Texas, is one vote off the result dictated by voters. When the electoral votes originally were counted in state capitals, one elector _ Margarette Leach of West Virginia _ cast her presidential vote for Sen. Lloyd Bentsen, D-Texas, and her vice presidential vote for Dukakis. Why did she do that? ``I wanted to make a statement about the Electoral College,'' she said. ``We've outgrown it. And I wanted to point up what I see as a weakness in the system: That 270 people can get together in this country and elect a president, whether he's on the ballot or not. In most states, electors can do whatever they want, if you're over 35 and a citizen.'' On Wednesday, Bush became the first sitting vice president since Martin Van Buren in 1837 to announce his own election as president. Bush shook hands with dozens of House members as he entered the House chamber in a procession in which the boxes containing the electoral ballots came first, Bush came next and members of the Senate brought up the rear. Early in the counting process, Rep. Frank Annunzio, D-Ill., a teller appointed by the House, forgot to give the names of the winners, declaring only that ``Arkansas casts six votes for president and six votes for vice president.'' ``Who? Who? Who?'' the audience of lawmakers chanted. Bush got off a quip. ``The chair wonders who won that,'' he said. The House chamber burst into applause. ``It's obvious they all know the answer to that,'' Bush said, displaying a happy grin. There were few other slips, although Annunzio repeatedly declared that he was announcing ``e-lec-tor-i-al'' votes. At least one grumble was heard after Bush announced the results: Rep. Frank McCloskey, D-Ind., said he believed the electoral system should be scrapped and replaced with a direct popular vote. He predicted that might well be done ``at some point where a president is elected by a minority.'' The Electoral College sprang from disagreement inside the Constitutional Convention over how a president should be elected. Direct popular election was opposed by delegates who feared that most people would not know enough about the candidates to make a wise choice. Other objections were raised to proposals that Congress select the president or that state legislatures do it. A committee was appointed and it hammered together a solution: Each state would appoint presidential electors equal to the total number of its senators and representatives in Congress. In present day terms, that comes to 435 members of the House of Representatives and 100 members of the Senate plus three electoral votes for the District of Columbia. On Election Day, the voters of each state actually choose electors pledged to the candidate of their choice and selected by state party organizations. To win election, a presidential candidate must receive 270 electoral votes, an absolute majority. If no candidate scores that high, the winner is picked by the House of Representatives from the three top vote getters. In that process, each state delegation casts just one vote. If no vice presidential candidate gets a majority, the victor is chosen by the Senate from the top two. 
A former nurse's aide charged in the deaths of two nursing home residents was the lookout while her accomplice suffocated patients in their beds, friends of the defendant testified Wednesday. In a preliminary hearing in 59th District Court, two women who identified themselves as friends of Catherine Wood testified that Wood had told them that a fellow nurse's aide, Gwendolyn Graham, was responsible for the deaths of patients at Alpine Manor Nursing Home in this Grand Rapids suburb. Wood, 26, was charged Dec. 5 with two counts of murder. Judge Sherwin Venema on Wednesday ordered her to stand trial on the charges. Graham, 25, was arrested Dec. 4 near her home in Tyler, Texas, and is fighting extradition to Michigan. She has been charged with one count of murder. Police suspect the two women in eight deaths at the nursing home in the first half of 1987, all of which were attributed to natural causes at the time. Two of the bodies have been exhumed, those of 60-year-old Marguerite Chambers and 97-year-old Edith Cook. Dawn Male, who was fired as a nurse's aide at Alpine in 1986, testified Tuesday that Wood and Graham showed her souvenirs the two had collected from patients they allegedly murdered, but that she thought it was a bad joke. She said the two, who were lesbian lovers, showed her a sock and a necklace and listed six or seven names of patients they killed. ``Gwen (Graham) said she used a pillow to suffocate patients. I didn't believe them. I thought they were joking around with me _ a sick joke,'' said Male, who admitted having a sexual relationship with the two women. Male said they told her Wood ``watched if someone was coming'' while Graham suffocated the patients. Both Male and another friend of the defendant testified Graham was the more violent of the pair and had physically abused Wood. Nancy Harris, who met Wood in June, said Wood ``told me that she was afraid for her life, that she was very worried about this particular woman (Graham).'' ``She said she had seen this woman suffocate Marguerite Chambers. She felt this woman was capable of killing anyone,'' she testified. Wood said Graham had tried to suffocate her, Harris testified. 
The mayor of the West Bank town of Bethlehem, who proposed a truce in the Palestinian uprising, appeared to be in hiding Wednesday after a warning from Yasser Arafat and death threats painted on the town walls. The Jerusalem Post on Tuesday quoted Mayor Elias Freij as saying he had withdrawn the truce idea. Freij said Friday that during a recent visit to Romania, he raised the possibility of a U.N.-sponsored truce in the year-old Palestinian uprising. He said he proposed conditions under which Israel would free 5,000 Palestinian prisoners, allow universities to open, and hold municipal elections for the first time in 12 years. ``I spoke about a U.N.-sponsored resolution like the one that stopped the Iran-Iraq war,'' he said in an interview with The Associated Press. He said he asked Romania's president, Nicolae Ceaucescu, to pass on the idea to Arafat. Since it began more than a year ago, 346 Arabs and 14 Jews have been killed in the uprising, or ``intefadeh.'' Arafat, in remarks broadcast Monday, said, ``No one can stop the intefadeh, and any responsible Palestinian calling for stopping it exposes himself to the bullets of our people.'' The PLO leader's comments were carried by the French-run Monte Carlo radio station, which has a large Middle East audience. Threats appeared on walls in Bethlehem, including ``Shame on Freij'' and ``Death to the betrayers.'' They were were written in red paint and signed by the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. One slogan signed by the front said Freij would share the same fate as Zafer Al Masri, a pro-Jordanian assassinated March 2, 1986 after being named mayor of the West Bank city of Nablus. Al Masri was appointed with Israel's approval and amid speculation he would play a role in a peace dialogue. The PFLP claimed responsibility for his slaying. Freij, a Christian who has close ties with Jordan, was quoted by the English-language Jerusalem Post as saying he was abandoning his truce idea because of PLO opposition. ``It is not up to me to make a decision. It is the PLO, our sole and legitimate representative, which makes the decision... I will not pursue my proposal for a truce any further,'' Freij was quoted as saying. Telephone calls to Freij's office went unanswered, and his home telephone was out of order. Jamal Salman, secretary of the City Council, told a reporter he did not know where the mayor was and knew nothing of his reaction to Arafat's statement. A reporter who went to Freij's home was turned away by a member of the Freij family. The relative said the mayor was not at home after first going inside to see if Freij was available. Hanna Siniora, editor of the daily Al Fajr newspaper, said he did not believe Arafat had meant to threaten Freij or other moderates. ``I feel the intention of Arafat was to say that the intefadeh was the most effective tool the Palestinians have to try to end the occupation and create coxeistence between two states, Palestine and Israel,'' Siniora said in a telephone interview. 
Shiite Moslem militias fought mortar battles in south Lebanon on Wednesday, while in Beirut's southern slums, Syrian troops moved to separate the warring factions. Police said 10 fighters were wounded in artillery duels between the pro-Syrian Amal and the Iranian-backed Hezbollah in the southern Iklim el-Tiffah, near Israel's security zone. The casualties raised the toll from five straight days of clashes to 29 dead and 76 wounded. Amal accused Hezbollah of shelling its forces from positions in the deserted Jbaa, Ein Bouswar, Jarjou, Arab Saleem and Louwaizeh villages on the northwestern edge of the security zone, a six- to 10-mile-wide strip of land Israel established in 1985 after withdrawing the bulk of its troops from Lebanon. ``We had to respond in order to silence the sources of fire,'' said an Amal spokesman, who refused to be identified. ``We are determined to end Hezbollah's provocative acts in the south once and for all.'' Amal, Arabic for ``hope,'' and Hezbollah, or Party of God, are struggling for dominance of Lebanon's 1 million Shiites, the country's largest sect. A police spokesman, who cannot be identified under standing regulations, described the situation in south Lebanon as ``more delicate than in south Beirut.'' ``The two factions are heading toward a showdown, and the Syrians are not there to control the situation at the last minute,'' he said. Syria, the main power broker in Lebanon, keeps 25,000 soldiers in eastern and northern Lebanon under a 1976 peacekeeping mandate from the Arab League. It has no troops in south Lebanon near the security zone. In the slums of south Beirut, the Syrians have 4,500 troops who were deployed in May to halt a three-week bloodbath between Amal and Hezbollah. The police spokesman said Syrian troops, armed with automatic rifles and rocket-propelled grenade launchers, manned buffer zones to separate fighters in south Beirut. He called the Syrian move ``another shot of tranquilizers'' and said the clashes would start again ``as long as the Syrians do not crack down on either side.'' Some south Beirut residents said they were convinced more fighting would erupt and left. ``They (the militias) still have plenty of weapons and ammunition. They will fight again,'' said Umm Mohammed, a Harat Hreik district resident who said she had moved in with her daughter in west Beirut. ``I'll only return to south Beirut when either of the two factions smashes the other or when the Syrians disarm both groups,'' she said. A Syrian military source said his command had no plans to do that. ``We talk to both sides, convince them of certain measures and deploy on the ground to implement these measures. There is no decision to crack down on either side,'' said the source who spoke on condition of anonymity. The Shiites' mufti, or religious judge, called for disarming both militias, saying ``their weapons have become tools for killing children and other innocent people.'' ``No one should be allowed to possess weapons in south Beirut except the Syrian forces,'' Sheik Abul Amir Qabalan said in a statement broadcast on Lebanese radio. 
The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute says at least 10 countries are reliably reported to have chemical weapons. At one time or another, 38 countries were reported to have chemical weapons, but the reports often were unreliable. Here is a list: 
Afghanistan France Iran Iraq North Korea Libya Syria Soviet Union United States Vietnam 
Burma China Egypt Ethiopia Israel Taiwan 
Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci has approved the recommendation of a special commission to close dozens of military bases across the country, setting the stage for a final debate on Capitol Hill, Pentagon officials said Wednesday. The officials, who insisted on anonymity, said Carlucci's decision ``was hardly unexpected'' and would be announced by the defense secretary at a press conference on Thursday. Carlucci has been a strong backer of efforts to close unneeded or obsolete military bases and strongly advocated the law passed last year that created the special government commission. Under that law, since Carlucci has now endorsed the panel's recommendations, Congress must either accept or reject the list of bases proposed for closure in its entirety; it cannot pick and choose or bargain over the fate of individual bases on the list. The commission has recommended actions affecting 145 military facilities, including 34 bases that would be closed outright. The Defense Department declined to discuss Carlucci's decision on Wednesday beyond saying he had scheduled a press conference ``and will send to Congress his decision regarding the recommendations ... on Thursday.'' Carlucci could have taken until Jan. 15 to make up his mind if he wished. The commission _ known formally as the Base Realignment and Closure Commission _ has recommended that 34 military installations and 52 military housing complexes be closed completely; that five other installations be partially closed, and that 54 others get new missions or additional personnel. All told, the panel has estimated the actions would produce savings of $693 million a year. While that is not an inconsiderable sum, it represents only a small part of the nation's spending on defense _ the Pentagon's budget this year totals $299.5 billion. Nonetheless, congressional leaders also have predicted the closing list will be approved. ``My general feeling is that this will be well received by the Congress,'' Sen. Sam Nunn, D-Ga., chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, said after the list was unveiled. He said the odds ``are heavily in favor'' of the recommendations taking effect. The largest affected bases are five Air Force bases _ Chanute in Illinois; George, Mather and Norton in California, and Pease in New Hampshire, all recommended for closing _ and three Army installations. The Army bases include Fort Dix, in New Jersey, to partially close, and Fort Sheridan in Illinois and the Presidio in downtown San Francisco to close completely. The Philadelphia Naval Hospital also would be closed completed. Other important bases that would be affected are Fort Meade, Md., to partially close, and the Jefferson Proving Ground, in Indiana, to close. The Pentagon has not shut down a major installation since 1977, mainly because of pressure from members of Congress with major bases in their districts. The closing process created last year requires the commission's entire package of proposals to be either accepted or rejected precisely with the idea of overcoming that political pressure from congressmen trying to protect local bases. 
A private research institute that monitors the world arms trade says Libya probably has joined at least nine other nations that possess or plan to acquire chemical weapons. The organization, the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, also says, however, that an accurate and certain count of countries posssessing such weapons is clouded by disinformation and vested interests. At one time or another, 38 countries were reported to have chemical weapons, but the reports often were unreliable or hard to assess, the institute said in its 1988 yearbook, which was published in August. Johan Lundin, an institute researcher, said in an interview Wednesday: ``It's hard to put a figure on it. A few countries have declared they have chemical weapons, others say they intend to have them, and there are a lot of allegations against other countries. We have no information of our own.'' The institute is a private research institute partially funded by the Swedish government. It was set up to monitor the world arms trade and developments in disarmament, mainly through published reports. The organization said in the 1988 yearbook that responsible U.S. and other government officials speaking on the record listed nine countries as having chemical weapons or intending to acquire them: France, Iraq, North Korea, Syria, the United States, the Soviet Union, Afghanistan, Iran and Vietnam. Since the book's publication, the United States has accused Libya of having a weapons-producing capability. Libya denies it. Lundin said the U.S. allegation about Libya's capability was as reliable as those on which the previous count of nine nations was based. The institute said other countries have been named in less reliable reports. A purported 1983 U.S. intelligence document leaked to the British Broadcasting Corp. added the names of Burma, China, Egypt, Ethiopia, Israel, Libya and Taiwan as possessors. Last year, Iran and Iraq were reported to have used toxic gases. Combatants in Angola, Mozambique and Afghanistan also made unsubstantiated allegations that they were victims of chemical warfare, Lundin said. In 1987, Libya was accused of using lethal gas in Chad and Vietnam was charged with poisoning water supplies in Cambodia and the institute's yearbook said chemical weapons were used in the Iran-Iraq war. The previous year, charges of chemical war were raised against Ethiopia, Iraq, Iran, the Soviet Union, Vietnam, Angola, Chad, Libya and Nicaragua, SIPRI reported without elaborating. 
A shootout between a policeman and a suspect killed a 14-year-old bystander, but an autopsy failed to show whose bullet was responsible, authorities said Wednesday. Jeffrey Vilain was shot in the head Tuesday night as he and his family were leaving a Jehovah's Witnesses meeting in Brooklyn, police said. ``We know he died of a gunshot wound to the head but no bullet was recovered,'' said spokeswoman Ellen Borakove of the medical examiner's office. ``The bullet entered his right cheek and exited the left side of the back of his head.'' She said authorities would continue to try and learn who fired the fatal shot. The shots were exchanged after plainclothes officers Kameron Brown, 25, and Sean Jennings, 27, confronted a man with a gun they saw get out of an unlicensed cab, said Sgt. Edward Burns. Darrel Koger, 24, was arrested in a nearby apartment, and hospitalized for a gunshot wound to the leg, Burns said. Koger was charged with attempted murder of a police officer and criminal possession of a deadly weapon, a 9mm automatic handgun. 
The Florida Supreme Court has agreed to hear oral arguments in an appeal by a migrant farm worker imprisoned for 20 years in the pesticide poisoning deaths of his seven children, the man's attorney said Wednesday. Attorney Ellis Rubin called the move ``a significant step on a possible road to freedom for James Richardson,'' a black man convicted by an all-white jury of one count of first-degree murder in a daughter's death. Attorneys for Richardson have obtained affidavits from two nursing home aides who say the children's babysitter, later deemed mentally incompetent, has confessed to poisoning the children's fatal lunch; and from a former Arcadia police chief charging that an ex-sheriff framed Richardson. Rubin had filed a writ with the Supreme Court asking for permission to return to the trial court to argue that perjured testimony was knowingly presented by the prosecution, the state suppressed evidence and new evidence has been discovered. ``I will urge the court to grant us permission to go back to the trial court in Fort Myers and seek a new trial,'' Rubin said. Richardson, whose death penalty was commuted to life by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1972, also is seeking clemency from the governor, whose office is investigating both the criminal case and allegations of prosecutorial wrongdoing. The prosecution argued at trial that Richardson killed his children to collect on a life insurance policy signed the night before the children ate their parathion-laced meal Oct. 25, 1967. But Rubin contends the prosecution withheld from evidence an insurance agent's card showing the policy was only an offer at the time of the mass killing. 
George Bush will conclude five days of inaugural festivities on Jan. 22, two days after he takes the oath as president, by leading 3,200 worshipers at an ecumenical service of ``prayer and thanksgiving'' at Washington Cathedral. The public will be admitted as seating is available for the 11 a.m. EST Sunday service. Seats will be reserved for an estimated 1,850 invited guests, including Bush family members, Cabinet members, Supreme Court justices, members of Congress, foreign diplomats and clergy. The worship service was the president-elect's idea, inaugural co-chairman Penne Percy Korth told a news briefing Wednesday. She said Bush and Vice President-elect Dan Quayle wanted to conclude inaugural celebrations with ``quiet reflection and prayer.'' Thousands of churches across the country have been asked to ring their bells at noon that day and join the cathedral congregation in prayers ``to humbly acknowledge the true source of our nation's strength,'' she said. Bush and his family will sit on the front row for the cathedral service led by Episcopal Bishop John T. Walker of Washington, assisted by Jewish, Roman Catholic and Greek Orthodox clergymen. There will be not one, but three, brief sermons. Portions of the service will be led by Bush's oldest son, George W. Bush; Susan Baker, wife of Secretary of State-designate James A. Baker III; Gov. John Ashcroft of Missouri; the Rev. Peter Gomes of Harvard University, and Bishop Edmond L. Browning, presiding bishop of the Episcopal Church of America. Roy Pfautch, a former Presbyterian minister from St. Louis who is general chairman of the service, said Bush is ``a very active and practicing Episcopalian'' but wants the service to include all faiths to ``stress ties that bind and not those that divide.'' 
The California Highway Patrol booked a motorist for evading arrest and other charges following a long, slow chase through four counties that never exceeded the speed limit, a spokesman said Wednesday. The CHP pursuit of a 1978 Volkswagen sedan began near Malibu at about 6:45 p.m. Tuesday and ended more than four hours and almost 200 miles later in San Diego County, Officer Cliff Williams said. ``His vehicle ran out of gas, that's why he stopped,'' Williams said. The driver, Brett T. Barish, 29, of La Jolla, was booked on charges of failure to yield to a peace officer, driving while intoxicated, driving without a valid license and seven miscellaneous warrants, Williams said. The chase began when Officer Donna Urqidi tried to stop the Volkswagen for driving very slowly while northbound on Malibu Canyon Road, about 30 miles west of downtown Los Angeles. The car stopped, Williams said, but as Urqidi approached the car, it pulled away. As Urqidi watched, the car turned eastbound on Mulholland Drive, going 35 mph. Reviewing the report that summarized the ensuing chase, Williams said, ``I've got six pages of where this vehicle traversed. It went Mulholland past Cold Canyon, past Stunt Road, past Turtle Creek. ... Let's see, then it turned onto northbound Topanga at 40 mph.'' Within 15 minutes, a Los Angeles police helicopter chattered overhead. And for the next four hours, at least two CHP patrol cars pursued the car, sirens screaming and lights flashing, as it wended it's way through Los Angeles, Riverside, Orange and San Diego counties. At 7:18 p.m. the fleeing car was reported eastbound on state route 134 at 55 mph. At 7:24 p.m. it was southbound on Interstate 5 at 55 mph. The CHP never really considered trying to force the car off the road, Williams said. ``Ramming a vehicle could lead to more serious consequences,'' Williams said, explaining the danger to other vehicles on the freeway. ``The only time we try to force someone off the road is if they're doing something dangerous that represents a threat to public safety.'' The car turned southbound on Interstate 215, then turned onto State Route 91 and followed that highway into San Diego County. The pursuit ended at 10:50 p.m. in the northbound lanes of Interstate 15. ``It's unusual when people attempt to evade, whether it's fast or slow,'' Williams said. ``But whenever they do evade us, we make every attempt to make the stop.'' 
Researchers say they may have observed an astronomical oddity: a remnant of a supernova star explosion within the remains of another supernova. If they are right, a star may have exploded less than 800 years ago inside the expanding shell of material from another star's explosion about 4,000 years ago. ``This is a speculative interpretation of the data,'' cautioned P.F. Winkler of Middlebury College in Vermont, one of the researchers reporting the evidence. ``I'm not persuaded by it,'' said Robert Fesen of the University of Colorado in Boulder, who was familiar with the work. Fesen said it is highly unlikely that two neighboring stars would explode at what astronomers consider virtually the same time. Nobody has reported such a double supernova elsewhere, he said. The new work is reported in Thursday's issue of the British journal Nature. It was written by Winkler, along with scientists at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics and the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory in Chile. At that observatory in February, they studied a collection of intertwined filaments near the center of the Puppis A supernova remnant. Analysis showed the filaments were made of different elements, including oxygen and sulfur that could be ejected by an exploding star. The appearance of the filaments was consistent with their being a supernova remnant, and their speed approached that seen in material ejected from a supernova, Winkler said. Although other supernova remnants give off X-rays and radio waves, none was observed from the filaments. Winkler said that suggests the filaments could be within the shell of the older supernova, where the high-pressure, low-density environment would prevent the emissions. Perhaps the double supernova resulted from explosions of two similar stars that were orbiting each other, he said. Fesen said he believes the filaments came from the original supernova explosion, and that they are a ``curious feature'' that should be explained in some way. 
A man said he killed a renowned ecologist to avenge his father, a cattle rancher involved in land disputes with the scientist, a newspaper reported Wednesday. ``I'm proud I shot him,'' Darcy Pereira da Silva, 21, was quoted as saying in the Rio newspaper Jornal do Brasil. Pereira da Silva is in jail in Rio Branco, in the Amazon state of Acre 2,656 miles northwest of Rio de Janeiro. ``I killed Chico Mendes because he forced my father to live on the run from the rubber tappers,'' Pereira da Silva was quoted as saying. ``He went to get an arrest warrant against my father, and every time I saw him he was calling the police.'' Francisco ``Chico'' Mendes, who was shot and killed Dec. 22, found out that Pereira da Silva's father, Darli Alves da Silva, was wanted by police in the southeastern state of Parana in connection with several murders. Mendes told local police about the warrant, and da Silva was forced to go into hiding, Pereira de Silva said. ``I killed him because I missed my father. He was a good man,'' Pereira da Silva was quoted as saying. Pereira da Silva, who turned himself in to police four days after the shooting, was quoted as saying Mendes opposed the family's efforts to clear Amazon jungle land for cattle grazing. Mendes, 44, was the head of a local rubber tappers union in his hometown of Xapuri, a jungle town 105 miles from Rio Branco. The union often blocked ranchers' efforts to clear rain forest by standing in front of bulldozers with family and community members. Federal Police Chief Romeu Tuma said police were ``90 percent'' sure Pereira da Silva took part in the shooting. He said police also were looking for an employee of the family ranch, Antonio Pereira, in connection with the killing. Tuma called the shooting of Mendes ``a family decision'' by the da Silva clan. He said police were looking for Darli Alves da Silva and his brother Alvarino in connection with the crime. The issue of how to develop the Amazon jungle, an expanse of rain forest about two-thirds the size of the continental United States, has often erupted in bloody clashes between landowners and politicians on one side and peasant farmers, progressive clergymen and ecologists on the other. 
Opponents in a legal battle between Dartmouth College and two suspended student journalists drew opposite messages Wednesday from a judge's ruling that the two must be reinstated to the college. In a decision released late Tuesday, Grafton County Superior Court Judge Bruce Mohl ordered the Ivy League school to reinstate Christopher Baldwin and John Sutter, former editors of the conservative, off-campus magazine Dartmouth Review. The two were suspended after a classroom confrontation with a black professor. Mohl found the school's disciplinary panel and the 18-month suspensions it imposed in March tainted by the participation of a professor who four months earlier signed a letter criticizing the Dartmouth Review as racist and sexist. ``I'm happy as a pig in mud,'' said Baldwin, 21, of Hinsdale, Ill., reached at the National Review, a conservative political magazine in New York where he has been working. ``I just want to go back and have a smooth and uneventful senior year at Dartmouth,'' he said. ``I just want to put this behind me.'' He and Sutter, 22, of St. Louis, are expected to return to campus Thursday. Classes resumed at the school Tuesday. Sutter also has been working as a journalist in New York. Their return won't end the matter; lawsuits are pending in state and federal courts charging Dartmouth with discriminating against conservatives. A spokesman for the college claimed Mohl's ruling was a victory for the school because the judge found ``no persuasive evidence'' to support the students' claim that they were brought up before the Committee on Standards because of their association with the Review. The disciplinary committee is made up of students, faculty members and administrators. The judge thus unequivocally rejected the students' ``major claim ... that there was a bias against conservative students and students affiliated with the Dartmouth Review,'' said the spokesman, Alex Huppe. ``Any other reading of that would be a self-serving and misleading reading,'' he said. But Harvey Myerson, one of the students' lawyers, said the judge did support the students' contention when he said in another paragraph, ``Contrary to the college's position, the charges against the four students did arise directly out of their activities on the Review.'' Mohl went on to note that the confrontation between music Professor William Cole and the students stemmed directly from their efforts to get his response to a Review article criticizing him. ``We don't think there's any question about it,'' Myerson said of whether the judge agreed the students were singled out for their Review ties. ``That's been a cornerstone of what we've been saying from the beginning.'' Baldwin, Sutter and two other Review staffers clashed with Cole after their magazine called one of Cole's courses ``one of Dartmouth's most academically deficient'' and denounced him for ``racist rantings.'' One of the other students also was suspended, but is already back on campus, and the fourth served probation. Myerson also insisted the judge drew no meaningful distinction between the nine-member disciplinary panel, whose chairman was the dean of the college, and Dartmouth itself. ``Obviously, the court didn't draw that distinction,'' Myerson said. ``The court found that the actions of the Committee on Standards were the actions of the college and ordered them (the students) reinstated.'' He called the dean the ``right-hand man'' to Dartmouth's president, who, he noted, received the anti-Review letter signed by the biased disciplinary board member. ``We felt from the beginning that the (disciplinary) process was really a sham process,'' Myerson said. ``It looked clean, it smelled clean, but it was dirty. The jury was stacked.'' Huppe disagreed, saying Mohl had affirmed ``the fundamental fairness of the disciplinary process.'' 
An elderly South Texas weather prognosticator assures George Bush's inaugural planners their worst nightmare _ a snowstorm _ won't come true to ruin the festivities surrounding Bush's swearing-in as president on Jan. 20. ``This old gentleman from South Texas sent me his almanac, which said the period from Jan. 19 to Jan. 23 will have sunny, warm and pleasant weather in Washington, D.C.,'' said Bobby Holt, general co-chairman of the President-elect's Inaugural Committee. Holt, a millionaire oil and gas tycoon and old friend of the vice president from Midland, Texas, told reporters Wednesday he couldn't recall the amateur weatherman's name and couldn't vouch for his accuracy. ``I'm scared to call him and ask about his track record,'' Holt said with a nervous laugh. He admitted the threat of a heavy storm during the inauguration was ``a constant worry.'' The National Weather Service said it couldn't predict Washington's weather that far ahead, except to say that average temperatures during the five days of inaugural events will range from 43 degrees to a low of 27. One of the worst inaugural snowstorms in modern memory occurred the night before John F. Kennedy took the presidential oath in 1960. The storm dumped eight inches of snow on Washington, halting all traffic and stranding guests trying to reach inaugural events. Army troops shoveled Pennsylvania Avenue clear of snowdrifts, and by noon on Jan. 20 it was clear, sunny and 22 degrees when a hatless Kennedy took the oath on the East Front steps of the Capitol. Because of extreme cold in January 1985, President Reagan moved his official swearing-in for a second term from the West Front of the Capitol inside to the Rotunda, and the traditional inaugural parade down Pennsylvania Avenue to the White House was canceled. 
South Korean government party officials on Wednesday rejected a North Korean proposal for unification talks involving political and religious leaders. The party officials accused North Korea of relying on a ``hackneyed'' propaganda aimed at causing unrest in South Korea. Opposition party leaders described the North Korean call as impractical or another political tactic ``out of impure motives.'' On Sunday, North Korean President Kim Il Sung called for a political conference with South Korean political and religious leaders to discuss reunification of the divided Korean peninsula. He invited to the proposed meeting in Pyongyang South Korean President Roh Tae-woo; leaders of three main opposition parties; Cardinal Kim Su-hwan, the top Roman Catholic leader in Seoul; and two dissident leaders, Mun Ik-hwan and Paek Ki-wan. Kim Il Sung did not mention Roh's repeated proposals for summit talks and invited him as head of the governing Democratic Justice Party. South Korean government officials charged Kim Il Sung's proposal was unfaithful and showed his intention not to recognize the Roh government, while dissident leaders reserved comment. ``We believe the north is trying to dampen our positive initiative for a summit meeting and other channels of dialogue,'' said a government official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. Kim Dae-jung, who heads South Korea's main opposition group, said the North Korean proposal was impractical. He declined to elaborate. Rival opposition leader Kim Young-sam questioned the north's intention behind the proposal, saying it ``appears to be aimed at causing division among South Korean political parties.'' The two Koreas in recent months have traded fresh proposals for dialogue _ sports talks, political and military talks on arms reductions and student talks _ in addition to on-going parliamentary talks. Lawmakers from both countries held a series of talks last year, with the latest meeting held Dec. 29 at the truce village of Panmunjom. Such talks have been held on and off since the early 1970s, but little progress has been made. Korea was divided north and south in 1945 when Soviet and U.S. troops ended Japan's colonial rule at the end of World War II. 
The United States is pleased with Cuban President Fidel Castro's announcement that he intends to release 225 remaining prisoners his government has recognized as political, the State Department's spokesman said Wednesday. ``We welcome the announced release of the political prisoners, particularly the remaining four long-term `plantados,' all of whom have served more than 19 years in prison,'' said spokesman Charles E. Redman. ``Plantados'' are prisoners who refused on principle to participate in rehabilitation programs or in some cases to wear jail uniforms. Some have been jailed since the first years after the 1959 revolution. Redman said Castro has promised officials of the U.S. Catholic Conference that he wil release the prisoners. The conference has been pressing since 1985 for such action. The Washington Post said Wednesday the group of prisoners includes 44 persons Havana has previously described as too dangerous to release from jail. Of the prisoners on the government's roster of those who have faced political charges, about 250 were released during 1988. The political prisoners the government has acknowledged include those named in a list of about 450 presented to Cuba in May 1988 by Cardinal John O'Connor of New York, the Post said. During the summer, Castro said that everyone on that list would be freed except the 44 he described as too dangerous. 
With the skirmish over the Mediterranean serving as a backdrop, the Reagan administration readied an urgent appeal Wednesday to industrialized nations to deny chemical weapons technology to Libya and to approve economic penalties for poison gas users. Even before U.S. jets shot down two Libyan fighter planes near Crete, the Reagan administration had served not-so-subtle notice to the world that it considers Moammar Gadhafi's drive to produce poison gas _ an allegation the Libyan leader has consistently denied _ a serious threat to world stability. In the wake of the clash, Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci and other senior U.S. officials sought to separate the incident from the drumbeat of alarm the Reagan administration has sounded for more than two months over the facility near the desert town of Rabta, about 40 miles south of Tripoli. The skirmish is bound to be center-stage at the chemical warfare conference that opens Saturday in Paris. And yet, William Burns, the U.S. arms control director, said ``it is not aimed at bashing a particular country.'' Referring to the U.S. downing of two Libyan jets, Burns told reporters at the State Department: ``I don't see it as really germane to the conference. I think that other nations will not see it as germane as well.'' He said the American delegation will focus on trying to strengthen the authority of United Nations Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar to investigate allegations of chemical weapons use and to authorize the U.N. General Assembly or Security Council to impose sanctions on nations that ``challenge world order.'' Burns conceded, however, this could be difficult since all actions will be taken by consensus. This means a single participant, such as Libya, could hold off an overwhelming majority. Mindful of the U.S. bombardment of the Libyan capital in April 1986, in which 37 persons including an adopted daughter of Gadhafi perished, a sense of foreboding enveloped the conference even before foreign ministers and ambassadors from more than 100 countries began to assemble in the French capital. It is routine for the United States not to rule out any option, including a military strike. And yet, when President Reagan took this familiar stance last month the world took notice. The downing of the two Libyan jets on Wednesday kept attention fastened on the Libyan facility. Secretary of State George P. Shultz, who flies to Paris on Thursday and will hold talks there through Sunday, will concentrate his efforts on the industrialized countries. Charles E. Redman, the State Department spokesman, said the key was to deny Gadhafi the equipment, material and expertise to produce poison gas. ``If these kind of things are going to be cut off it's going to be very difficult for a plant of this kind to operate,'' he said. The 1925 international protocol under review in Paris bans the use of chemical weapons, but does not outlaw their production. Some 20 nations, by U.S. estimate, either have produced chemical weapons or are capable of manufacturing them. The protocol has no enforcement mechanism. Its effectiveness depends on the self-discipline of the 130 nations that are parties to the pact. At one time, the civilized world abhorred poison gas. But Iraq, which signed the 1925 agreement, discovered in the Persian Gulf war that chemical weapons were effective against numerically superior Iranian forces. And some Third World countries resent interference with their chemical industries. To try to stem proliferation, Redman said ``we are prepared to discuss the strongest possible measures'' against countries that export chemical weapons technology. The West European governments have responded with some skepticism to the U.S. allegations against Libya and its alleged suppliers, however. West German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher said Wednesday his government had no evidence proving West German pharmaceutical firm had helped build the plant at Rabta. A spokesman for Genscher said, meanwhile, Bonn had accused Washington for ``additional material'' to back up the allegation. But the Reagan administration has not pulled back. Robert M. Gates, a former CIA deputy director who was named last week as deputy director of the National Security Council, said in a recent speech that the plant was built with the help of ``nearly a dozen nations, East and West.'' He declined to name them. The United States stopped production of chemical weapons in 1969, then resumed 17 years later on the grounds the Soviet Union and other potential adversaries had chemical weapons programs. Currently, U.S. chemical components and artillery shells to contain them are being produced but stockpiled separately. The Soviet Union acknowledged in 1987 possession of chemical weapons, then claimed to have ceased production. A foreign ministry spokesman said 50,000 tons would be stored, the rest destroyed. Officials of the two countries have held nine sessions in Geneva to plan ways to restrict proliferation. So far, the United States and the Soviet Union are the only two countries in the world to admit possessing chemical weapons. 
President Reagan, acknowledging recent human rights reforms in the Soviet Union, agreed Wednesday to U.S. participation in a 1991 human rights conference in Moscow. The meeting was part of a three-conference schedule in Europe approved by Reagan. ``The president decided to agree to this schedule, including the Moscow conference, as a means of encouraging continuation of the significant progress in human rights that has taken place in the Soviet Union over the past three years,'' deputy press secretary Roman Popadiuk told a briefing as Regan vacationed in California. Britain quickly announced its concurrence in approving the 1991 Moscow conference, paving the way for new East-West negotiations to reduce conventional forces in Europe. Britain and the United States had taken the toughest line on Moscow's ambition to host a human rights conference, and Wednesday's announcement opened the way to wrapping up 35-nation talks between East and West in Vienna, due to end this month. The ending of the current Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe talks in Vienna is a prerequisite for starting new East-West negotiations on reducing conventional weapons and troops in Europe. Popadiuk said Reagan's decision was prompted by evident progress in Soviet human rights, including the release of hundreds of political prisoners and the granting of exit permission for many who had long been refused the right to emigrate. ``Emigration rates from the Soviet Union are substantially higher and jamming of the Voice of America, Radio Liberty and other Western broadcasts have ceased,'' Popadiuk said The three-conference schedule which Reagan approved calls for a meeting in Paris in 1989, a second in Copenhagen in 1990 and the third in Moscow in 1991. Popadiuk warned that the United States could reconsider participation in the Moscow conference if the Soviets should reverse their recent pattern of progress in the area of human rights. ``The president recognizes that there is much yet to be done in the Soviet Union before that nation meets acceptable and universal human rights standards,'' Popadiuk said. ``We will make it clear to the Soviet Union that the lack of future and institutionalized progress or a reversal of progress made to date will cause us to reconsider our decision to attend a Moscow conference in 1991,'' he said. The British Foreign Office placed similar limitations on its participation, setting down specific requirements to be met by the Soviets by 1991 if Britain is to participate in the Moscow conference. The British statement said that by 1991 ``we shall expect to see:'' _Implementation of Gorbachev's promised changes in the criminal code; _Effective guarantees for freedom of religion, speech and emigration; _An end to the imprisonment of people for their political or religious beliefs or their incarceration in psychiatric hospitals; _That all long-term ``refusedniks'' are allowed to emigrate. The human rights conferences and the European arms negotiations are linked, and Secretary of State George P. Shultz recommended the U.S. agreement to Reagan, a U.S. official told The Associated Press. ``At present, we believe that Western concurrence in principle in such a Moscow conference may be the best way to encourage and support future improvement in Soviet human rights performance,'' Popadiuk said. Shultz is to meet Sunday with Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze in Paris, where they will be attending a conference of more than 100 nations on ways to halt the proliferation of chemical weapons. The start of conventional arms reduction talks between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Warsaw Pact has been awaiting completion of the 35-nation review in Vienna of human rights in the Soviet Union and in Eastern Europe. Austria, as host of the talks in Vienna, has invited the participating nations to attend a three-day closing meeting Jan. 17. The new Conventional Stability Talks on arms and troop reductions are due to be held between the 16 NATO countries and the seven members of the Communist-led Warsaw Pact military alliance. Agreement to the Moscow conference signaled a dramatic shift in British attitudes since it was first proposed in 1986. At that time, senior officials of the British government described the proposal as outlandish and one top policy-maker likened it to ``holding a whiskey distillers' convention in Riyadh,'' capital of teetotaling Saudi Arabia. But since then Western countries have acknowledged changes or promises of change by Gorbachev. 
A judge has ruled unconstitutional an ordinance designed to stop homosexual activity in Orlando parks by prohibiting anyone from walking or sleeping in bushes. The decision Tuesday by Judge Walter Komanski reverses the conviction of a retired Air Force colonel who was arrested even though he said he was in a park only because he was waiting for his wife. The judge said the regulations are too vague an attempt to govern activity that is no threat to public safety. ``Ordinary innocent conduct is made criminal, and the police are provided unfettered discretion to arrest law-abiding citizens who may stray into bushes or foliage at a city park,'' Komanski said in his ruling. Police have been using the ordinance for a couple of years to crack down on homosexual activity and loitering by transients in Langford Park near downtown. Police officials contended homosexuals were using paths that wind through dense groves of trees and bushes to commit sexual acts. Homosexual and civil rights groups have clashed with officers and city officials over enforcement of the law, contending police were stopping only single men while ignoring women, children and heterosexual couples. ``I have no problem with them enforcing laws that apply to all people,'' said Michael Wanzie, a spokesman for the gay rights group We The People. Police Chief Dan Wilson said homosexual activity has declined since last March and police have made fewer arrests. The city's police legal adviser, John Ross, said he would advise the department to continue enforcing the law because Komanski's ruling is not binding on other judges. But the defense attorney in the case predicted that other attorneys would cite Komanski's ruling. The law makes it a misdemeanor to ``sleep or otherwise be or remain in any bushes, shrubs or other foliage'' in a city park. Violators are subject to a $500 fine and 60 days in jail. The ruling was on an appeal by William Marsden, who was arrested May 19, 1986, at Langford Park. Police said an undercover officer saw Marsden walking in the park for two hours before disappearing into the bushes with another man. Marsden told County Judge Dorothy Russell that he was walking in the park while waiting for his wife and walked off a boardwalk at the time another man happened to be walking in front of him. Marsden pleaded no contest, was fined $100 and ordered to stay out of city parks for 60 days, according to court records. He appealed and the judge's ruling overturns the conviction. 
A consultant under investigation in the Defense Department fraud case once left his car in the Pentagon parking lot so a federal employee he had paid $100 a week could dump government documents in the trunk, newly released ourt papers showed Wednesday. The papers _ search warrants and affadavits _ were made public as defense attorneys speculated that indictments in the nationwide investigation which began in September 1986 could be returned as early as Friday. Sharon Dibbley, spokeswoman for U.S. Attorney Henry Hudson, said the federal grand jury meets on Thursday and Friday. She would not say whether Hudson expects indictments then, or when any plea-bargain arrangements might be disclosed. Some companies and their employees are known to be talking to the government about plea bargaining. Prosecutors said last week they no longer need to keep under seal search warrants and affidavits issued in June because they have completed the investigative phase of the case. Papers have been released here and in Brooklyn, N.Y., but remain under seal in St. Louis, Minneapolis and Los Angeles. A search warrant for the home of William Parkin, a consultant who was employed by the Navy's Joint Cruise Missile Project Office from 1977 until 1983, provides a wealth of new detail about how Parkin ran his consulting business, using money and personal relationships to gather information. At the heart of the case are allegations that consultants were paid by defense contractors _ and used the money to bribe Pentagon employees _ to obtain inside information on contracts worth millions of dollars. An unusual relationship developed between Parkin and Jean Uebele, a former contract negotiator at the cruise missile office where Parkin once worked, the search warrant showed. Information in the warrant was obtained by intercepting telephone conversations. ``Uebele frequently called for her biweekly checks of $50,'' the paper said. Parkin's secretary at the time, Sheila Wohlfarth, once told Uebele she was making the checks out to ``Smith's Maid Service.'' Occasionally, Parkin asked Uebele to give him copies of documents. The warrant added: ``In one conversation in March 1987, Uebele called Parkin and told him that if he parked his car in her place at the Pentagon, she would put materials in the trunk, including all of her instructions, cost and pricing lists, reference books, copies of every contract and information relating to MCDEC.'' MCDEC is the Marine Corps Development Education Center. Uebele retired from her Navy job last week, her office said. Her former employers said they did not have a forwarding telephone number, and her home number was unlisted. Parkin's attorney, Gerard Treanor, has said his client is confident he had done nthing wrong. ``Parkin is going to be found not guilty before a jury,'' Treanor said. The warrant also discussed conservations between Parkin, Mrs. Wohlfarth and her husband, Robert Wohlfarth, a Navy patent attorney. ``In an April 1987 conversation, Wohlfarth complained to his wife that Parkin promptly paid the other guys he worked with or they called him. The implication was that Parkin owed Wohlfarth for the information he had provided.'' Wohlfarth refused to discuss the matter and referred all calls to his attorney, Neil Eggleston, who was out of town. Parkin had a series of relationships with defense contractors, including Teledyne Electronics of Newbury Park, Calif.; Hazeltine Corp., Long Island, N.Y., Northrop and Unisys. Investigators say the contractors paid Parkin thousands of dollars. The court documents said investigators believe Parkin may have been working for private companies before he retired from the government in 1983. Parkin ``has said that he was helping other consultants make money while working at JCMPO by providing them with information,'' the papers said. ``Parkin also mentioned working for companies directly while in government.'' While the investigation was under way in 1987, Parkin apparently was finding business more difficult. The search warrant said he ``told different people how it had become more difficult than in the past to obtain the information because more people were concerned about going to jail.'' 
The U.S. F-14 fighter that shot down Libyan MiG-23 warplanes over the Mediterranean Sea on Wednesday is more maneuverable and has more sophisticated radar and weapons than the Soviet-made plane, say retired Navy officers. ``We have felt that the F-14 has been and continues to be the world's best fighter plane,'' said retired Adm. Elmo Zumwalt, who served as Chief of Naval Operations in 1970-74. The American pilots were almost certainly better trained than their Libyan adversaries, other experts said. ``You are kind of putting professionals up against amateurs,'' said retired Marine Lt. Col. John Buchanan, a pilot who flew the A-6, another carrier-based aircraft. Zumwalt, who lives in the Virginia suburbs of Washington, said that ``even if the Libyan pilots were as good as ours, the F-14 could outpoint them.'' U.S. analyses of the MiG-23 show it to be ``a highly maneuverable, a very high-speed craft. But its avionics and missile systems cannot compete with the F-14,'' he said. Norman Polmar of the Naval Institute Data Base said that the ``the F-14 is a lot more airplane, a lot more expensive to build and to fly'' than the MiG-23, which epitomizes the Soviet philosophy of building ``lots of less expensive airplanes.'' The F-14 has two engines to the MiG's one, giving it greater acceleration, has twin rear fins, giving it greater maneuverability, and although both fighters have wings that sweep back in flight, those on the F-14 operate automatically while the MiG-23's are directed by the pilot, said Polmar. ``The (F-14) pilot does not have to think, he just flies,'' said Polmar. Moreover, the F-14 pilot is assisted by a radar-weapons officer, while the MiG-23 pilot is alone. One of the F-14's strongest points is its sophisticated radar system, which is capable of looking down and over great distances while tracking 24 targets at once, according to the Navy. The AWG-9 weapons tracking system can fire up to six Phoenix missiles while continuing to scan the airspace, according to the Navy. Both the F-14 and the MiG-23 entered production more than 15 years ago and fly at similar speeds and heights. The F-14 Tomcat, which began aircraft carrier trials in 1972, remains ``the premier all-weather, day-night air defense fighter in the world,'' according to the Navy. Production by Grumman of Long Island, N.Y., is expected to continue into the 1990s. A prototype of the MiG-23 was seen in public for the first time at a Moscow air show in 1967. The fighter, known to NATO pilots as the Flogger, entered active duty in 1973, according to Jane's ``All the World`s Aircraft.'' The Flogger is flown by all the air forces in the Moscow-led Warsaw Pact and by 1987 had been sold to a dozen other countries, according to Jane's. At takeoff, Floggers have wings that are fully extended to 46 feet and sweep back to about 25 feet as the fighter cruises at Mach 2, twice the speed of sound or about 1,400 mph, at its maximum altitude of 59,000 feet above sea level, according to Jane's. Libya's MiG-23's are armed with one 23mm Gsh-23-L twin barrel gun and can carry AA-2 Atoll air-to-air missiles, said Polmar. Before the incident, Libya's Soviet-built fighters included 44 MiG-21s, 131 MiG-23Es, 67 of the more advanced MiG-25 Foxbats and 92 Sukhoi 20-22 fighters. Additionally, Libya had 22 French-made Mirages, according to ``The Military Balance,'' published by the London-based Institute for International Strategic Studies. The American F-14 also is a swept-wing aircraft, taking off with wings spread to 64 feet and flying with the wings swept back to 38 feet as it approaches a top speed of 2.34 times the speed of sound, or 1,544 mph at its ceiling of 50,000 feet. The Tomcat is armed with an M-61 Vulcan 20mm gun and can carry four Sparrow and four Sidewinder missiles, or a different mixture of Sparrow, Sidewinder and Phoenix missiles, and it can carry bombs, the Navy said. The F-14s on Wednesday fired Sparrow and Sidewinder missiles, Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci said. 
President Reagan, acknowledging recent human rights reforms in the Soviet Union, agreed Wednesday to U.S. participation in a 1991 human rights conference in Moscow. The meeting was part of a three-conference schedule in Europe approved by Reagan. ``The president decided to agree to this schedule, including the Moscow conference, as a means of encouraging continuation of the significant progress in human rights that has taken place in the Soviet Union over the past three years,'' deputy press secretary Roman Popadiuk told a briefing as Regan vacationed in California. Britain quickly announced its concurrence in approving the 1991 Moscow conference, paving the way for new East-West negotiations to reduce conventional forces in Europe. Britain and the United States had taken the toughest line on Moscow's ambition to host a human rights conference, and Wednesday's announcement opened the way to wrapping up 35-nation talks between East and West in Vienna, due to end this month. The ending of the current Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe talks in Vienna is a prerequisite for starting new East-West negotiations on reducing conventional weapons and troops in Europe. Popadiuk said Reagan's decision was prompted by evident progress in Soviet human rights, including the release of hundreds of political prisoners and the granting of exit permission for many who had long been refused the right to emigrate. ``Emigration rates from the Soviet Union are substantially higher and jamming of the Voice of America, Radio Liberty and other Western broadcasts have ceased,'' Popadiuk said The three-conference schedule which Reagan approved calls for a meeting in Paris in 1989, a second in Copenhagen in 1990 and the third in Moscow in 1991. Popadiuk warned that the United States could reconsider participation in the Moscow conference if the Soviets should reverse their recent pattern of progress in the area of human rights. ``The president recognizes that there is much yet to be done in the Soviet Union before that nation meets acceptable and universal human rights standards,'' Popadiuk said. ``We will make it clear to the Soviet Union that the lack of future and institutionalized progress or a reversal of progress made to date will cause us to reconsider our decision to attend a Moscow conference in 1991,'' he said. The British Foreign Office placed similar limitations on its participation, setting down specific requirements to be met by the Soviets by 1991 if Britain is to participate in the Moscow conference. The British statement said that by 1991 ``we shall expect to see:'' _Implementation of Gorbachev's promised changes in the criminal code; _Effective guarantees for freedom of religion, speech and emigration; _An end to the imprisonment of people for their political or religious beliefs or their incarceration in psychiatric hospitals; _That all long-term ``refusedniks'' are allowed to emigrate. The human rights conferences and the European arms negotiations are linked, and Secretary of State George P. Shultz recommended the U.S. agreement to Reagan, a U.S. official told The Associated Press. ``At present, we believe that Western concurrence in principle in such a Moscow conference may be the best way to encourage and support future improvement in Soviet human rights performance,'' Popadiuk said. Shultz is to meet Sunday with Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard A. Shevardnadze in Paris, where they will be attending a conference of more than 100 nations on ways to halt the proliferation of chemical weapons. The start of conventional arms reduction talks between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Warsaw Pact has been awaiting completion of the 35-nation review in Vienna of human rights in the Soviet Union and in Eastern Europe. Austria, as host of the talks in Vienna, has invited the participating nations to attend a three-day closing meeting Jan. 17. The new Conventional Stability Talks on arms and troop reductions are due to be held between the 16 NATO countries and the seven members of the Communist-led Warsaw Pact military alliance. Agreement to the Moscow conference signaled a dramatic shift in British attitudes since it was first proposed in 1986. At that time, senior officials of the British government described the proposal as outlandish and one top policy-maker likened it to ``holding a whiskey distillers' convention in Riyadh,'' capital of teetotaling Saudi Arabia. But since then Western countries have acknowledged changes or promises of change by Gorbachev. 
Enough body parts, including a severed head, have been found and reassembled to tentatively identify the victim as a city man with a checkered past who met a grisly end around Christmas, police said Wednesday. ``Murder's always gruesome. When they decapitate the body and then dissect it, it becomes that much more gruesome,'' said Allegheny County Police Superintendent Robert Kroner. Body parts have been found in scattered locations east of Pittsburgh. The victim is thought to be Anthony Patrick Michalowski, a 22-year-old unemployed Pittsburgh resident known to hang out on the street. The head, severed from his body with a machete or similar weapon, was found along with a 1{- to 2-foot piece of large intestine in a plastic garbage bag in a commercial garbage bin behind a shopping center in North Versailles on Dec. 27. The victim had been dead 24 to 48 hours, said Coroner Joshua Perper. The lower jaw had been removed, apparently to hinder identification. It was found Tuesday outside a steel mill several miles away in North Braddock. A tongue, small intestines and several strands of hair were found in the same plastic garbage bag with the jaw. Authorities believe the body pieces came from the same body and are testing them for confirmation. A dog turned up a lung Dec. 28 in Whitaker, across the Monongahela River from North Braddock. Lab tests determined that the lung and head came from the same body. The coroner's staff stitched the lower jaw and lip to the head on Tuesday, allowing police to distribute a sketch of the victim's face. Michalowski's aunt and brother recognized the sketch on television, notified police and then identified the blond, blue-eyed head at the morgue Tuesday night. Dental records, showing two fillings, also suggest the victim was Michalowski. Police said a close comparison of the victim's teeth with Michalowski's dental records will confirm the identification. ``We no longer have to call him `The Head,' '' Kroner said. ``That's a terrible thing to have to refer to a human being as `The Head.' '' Identifying the victim, however, is ``only part of a victory,'' the superintendent said. ``We've got an awful lot of work to do. Our jobs are only really beginning now,'' he said. ``Now detectives have to go out and start interviewing people, start tracing his steps so we can get back to the night of his demise if that's possible.'' Michalowski was last seen alive around 7 p.m. Christmas Eve standing on Pittsburgh's Liberty Avenue, a downtown strip known for prostitution and pornography, Kroner said. ``He spent a lot of time downtown,'' he said. ``He had a lengthy record for things street people do such as disorderly conduct.'' Michalowski's criminal record, released by police, lists about 10 charges since 1984, and he was awaiting trial on robbery charges, according to Kroner. Detectives were checking reports that Michalowski may have been associated with prostitution or drugs, Kroner said. ``We're hearing a lot of stories,'' he said. ``We can't substantiate the rumors.'' Michalowski lived at times with his aunt, Carol Michalowski, on Pittsburgh's North Side. She said her nephew had gone out for a Christmas tree prior to the holiday and never returned. ``A head. That's all I've got. I don't even know if they'll give me that,'' she told KDKA-TV. Detectives say they may need the rest of the body to be sure that Michalowski was murdered and not just mutilated after dying from another cause. ``The rest of the body certainly would be helpful,'' Kroner said. 
Private exporters have sold an additional 440,000 metric tons of U.S. wheat to China at subsidized prices and also more corn to the Soviet Union, the Agriculture Department reported Wednesday. Melvin E. Sims, general sales manager for the department's Foreign Agricultural Service, said the wheat was part of 1 million tons authorized Dec. 30 for China under the Export Enhancement Program, or EEP. Under the EEP arrangement, exporters can sell wheat and other designated commodities to specified countries at reduced prices in order to meet foreign competition. Exporters then collect free government surpluses of grain or other products as bonuses, or subsidies. The wheat sales, equal to about 17.3 million bushels, were handled by five companies: Continental Grain Co., 70,000 tons; Cargill Inc., 270,000; Tradigrain Inc., 30,000; Tradecom Inc., 30,000; and Louis Dreyfus Corp., 40,000. Sims said the wheat was sold for January delivery and will carry an average subsidy rate of $22.64 per ton, or about 62 cents per bushel. Counting some wheat left over from previous EEP arrangements, China has 570,000 tons still available under the program. The Soviet Union bought an additional 250,000 tons of corn for delivery under a long-term grain agreement with the United States. That boosted corn sales to the Soviets in the 1988-89 agreement year to nearly 10.2 million tons. Besides the corn, the Soviets have ordered 370,000 tons of wheat, 450,000 tons of soybeans and 1,132,500 tons of soybean meal, plus 500,000 tons of grain sorghum for 1988-89 delivery. Only the wheat has been subsidized. A metric ton is about 2,205 pounds and is equal to 39.4 bushels of corn or 36.7 bushels of wheat or soybeans. The 440,000 tons of wheat would be about 16.1 million bushels. The latest corn sales to the Soviet Union would be about 9.9 million bushels. Wheat prices at the farm have been averaging around $4 per bushel, according to recent USDA market figures, making the new sale worth an estimated $64 million. The corn, at $2.60 per bushel, could have a farm value of about $26 million. 
Surgeons transplanted a third liver into a 5-year-old boy whose second operation was made possible by a mother who volunteered an organ intended for her child. Jason Point of Deale, Md., was in critical condition Wednesday, considered normal for recent transplant patients. On Tuesday, he received the third transplant in a 17{-hour operation at Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh. Jason received his first transplanted liver in November 1985. Last November, after problems developed with that liver, he was given a liver originally intended for Candi Thomas, 6, of Accokeek, Md. Penny Thomas offered to let Jason have a transplant first when he took a turn for the worse as Candi, herself the veteran of a prior transplant, was being readied for surgery. Surgeons eventually corrected Candi's liver problem without another transplant, and she left the hospital Dec. 16. Jason needed the third transplant because ``his condition had gone downhill over the past week or so,'' said hospital spokeswoman Lynn McMahon. Doctors discovered an abscess in the liver two days ago. Both children were born with a birth defect that prevents proper liver function. 
The shooting down of two Libyan jet fighters by American military planes is just another bitter episode in eight years of bad blood between President Reagan and Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi. The tone of the U.S.-Libyan long-distance relationship was set in 1981 when the new president expelled Libyan diplomats from the United States for an ``unacceptable pattern of conduct.'' And it continued its unyielding way through last week when, less than a month away from leaving office, Reagan officially declared that Libya still was not meeting ``minimum standards of human behavior.'' The United States has shown its disgust with the Libyans' behavior the past three years by freezing Libyan assets in this country. A paper Reagan signed on Dec. 28 extends the authority for the U.S. sanctions for another six months because, Reagan said, ``the government of Libya continues to use and support international terrorism.'' Tension between the two nations has been rising in recent weeks, with the United States charging that Libya has built a plant for producing chemical weapons. Libya said the factory produces pharmaceuticals. Reagan said military action against the plant was under consideration. At the Pentagon on Wednesday, Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci said in response to questions about the shooting incident that the American planes and their carrier, the USS John F. Kennedy, were not in the area with the intention of attacking any such factory and ``had no connection whatsoever'' with it. At the State Department, spokesman Charles Redman said, ``It may be ironic, but the two things are not related.'' Gadhafi called the incident an example of increased American terrorism and said he would ``meet challenge with challenge.'' The Libyan leader has been open about his own support for some terrorism. In 1985, when Palestinians attacked airports in Rome and Vienna, killing 15 people including an 11-year-old American girl, Gadhafi called the incidents ``the most sacred action on Earth.'' Asked about those remarks, Reagan said: ``I don't answer fellows who think it's all right to shoot 11-year-old girls.'' Gadhafi has been at Libya's helm since he overthrew King Idris in 1969. One of his first actions then was to close down U.S. and British military bases. He nationalized most oil companies and expelled more than 20,000 foreigners, although thousands of Americans remained in Libya working in the oil fields. With his oil money _ Libya remained the third-largest foreign supplier of oil to the United States _ Gadhafi bought billions of dollars worth of Soviet arms. He proclaimed his kinship with Fidel Castro and the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. In December 1979, a mob ransacked and burned the American Embassy in Tripoli in support of the Iranians who seized the U.S. Embassy and took hostages in Tehran. Then-President Carter ordered the embassy in Libya closed, but American oil companies maintained business. In May 1981, Reagan severed diplomatic ties and in August came the shooting of two Libyan warplanes the U.S. government said were trying to intercept two U.S. Navy F-14 fighters over the Gulf of Sidra. Three months later, there were reports that Libya had sent ``hit teams'' to assassinate Reagan, Vice President George Bush and other top government officials. The tightened security put in place in Washington as a result still is in place. In December 1981 the U.S. halted travel to Libya and asked Americans to leave that country. Some did, but many did not. The following March the Reagan administration banned all oil imports from Libya, and Exxon and Mobil withdrew their operations. In June 1983, the U.S. Navy staged maneuvers off Libya's coast amid allegations that Libyans were supporting dissidents in Western-backed Chad and Sudan. Navy jets chased away two Libyan MiG-23 fighters. More shooting broke out in March 1986 when American planes extended their operations below the ``line of death'' drawn by Gadhafi across the Gulf of Sidra and Libyans fired six surface-to-air missiles toward U.S. aircraft, missing them. U.S. aircraft retaliated by shooting and setting afire a Libyan patrol boat and hitting a shoreline missile site. The administration's actions were applauded by congressional leaders, Democrats as well as Republicans. On April 15, American planes bombed five military targets around the major port cities of Tripoli and Benghazi to punish Libya for what Reagan called ``Gadhafi's reign of terror.'' He said the raid was in retaliation for the fatal bombing of a Berlin night club and described it as ``an engagement in the long battle.'' There is nothing new about the U.S.-Libyan tensions. Nearly two centuries ago, President Thomas Jefferson dispatched warships to blockade Tripoli harbor when the ruler of Tripolitana, Youssef Karamanli demanded $250,000 a year to prevent his pirates from raiding U.S. merchant ships in the Mediterranean. Then, as now, Americans said freedom of the seas was at stake. 
As much as $2 million in coins owned by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago is missing, and the FBI is investigating the suburban armored car company where the money was stored, officials said Wednesday. The Fed suspended its dealings with the Public Armored Car Inc. of Bensenville last week after an audit revealed the shortage, said Nancy Goodman, a spokeswoman for the agency. Maureen Dillon, a receptionist at Public Armored, said company President John Boyle was the only person who could talk about the shortage and he was not in the office Wednesday. The exact amount of money missing was not released, but Ms. Goodman said it was a ``substantial loss.'' ``The only thing we had on deposit there was coins and when we discovered the shortage, we removed the rest of our funds to our own vaults,'' Ms. Goodman said. The FBI was investigating, Ms. Goodman said. FBI spokesman Bob Long declined to say whether the agency was on the case. The Chicago Tribune quoted sources it did not identify Wednesday as saying the loss was about $2 million, but said the exact amount would not be known for several days. Public Armored was serving as a depot for coins being transferred between banks and the Fed, Ms. Goodman said. The company began working with the agency in July. The company was one of six storing coins and making coin deliveries for the Fed to banks and savings institutions in the Chicago area, Ms. Goodman said. Because insurance covers the loss, no financial institution will be affected by the shortage, she said, but they will have to make arrangements with other armored car companies. ``We inspected their (Public Armored's) facility when we started with them and did a second on-site inspection in late December. That's when we found the shortage,'' Ms. Goodman said. The money shortage was ``very unusual'' because the Fed and the firms hired to deliver cash are in daily telephone contact to confirm how much money is delivered and to whom, she said. ``We balanced with them (Public Armored) by telephone every day and those numbers balanced,'' she said. ``When we went to do a physical inspection we found less money than what should have been there.'' When a bank wants to make a deposit in coins to its account at the Fed, the coins are picked up by an armored company and taken to a warehouse and the agency is notified the transaction has been made, she explained. When a bank needs coins, the Fed is notified and a delivery is made from the warehouse. Several banks use Public Armored to hold large amounts of coins, she said. The company also has contracts to pick up coins for the Illinois State Toll Highway Authority. 
A panel of researchers began looking Wednesday for ways to speed approval of drugs for treating cancer and AIDS, and the Food and Drug Administration declared that ``drugs for the desperately ill remain our highest priority.'' Critics have accused the FDA of being too conservative in its evaluation of new drugs for cancer and AIDS. At the panel's initial meeting, officials of the National Cancer Institute said the regulatory agency could make therapies available earlier without sacrificing patient safety. FDA Commissioner Frank E. Young said recent changes in the agency's approval process will make new drugs available in half the time it used to take. Already, FDA review takes an average of seven months for cancer drugs, he said, and the only AIDS drug approved so far underwent review in 107 days. Young assured members of the panel of academic and drug industry researchers that ``drugs for the desperately ill remain our highest priority.'' However, Bruce Chabner, director of cancer treatment at the National Cancer Institute, said the FDA should be more flexible and encourage early testing of new drugs in children who have cancer and AIDS. Samuel Broder, director of the National Cancer Institute, said the FDA is too stringent in the proof it requires that a new drug extend survival longer than existing drugs. The result, Broder said, is that effective therapies are being rationed. Dr. Louis Lasagna, chairman of the study panel, said his committee hopes to establish ``mechanisms to mediate'' the fireworks and improve communications between the FDA and the cancer institute. ``Because there is so much public pressure regarding AIDS, about not wasting time getting treatments to victims ... we might be able to capitalize on that concern to bring about improvements in the drug approval process,'' Lasagna said. Dr. Armand Hammer, chairman of the President's Cancer Panel who appointed the study group last year, said he believes the FDA's process for approving drugs can be reduced from several years to less than a year. He said the FDA's recent improvements are not enough. But in defense of the agency, he said: ``FDA wants to be sure of the safety, and this is their first concern, and it should be. They certainly don't want to give them (patients) drugs that are going to kill them. ``On the other hand, we have to have indications that we can prolong life of people with AIDS,'' he said, using that incurable and fatal disease as an example. So far, the FDA has approved only one drug, AZT, that has been shown to prolong the lives of victims of AIDS, or acquired immune deficiency syndrome. Dr. Anthony Fauci, who is in charge of AIDS research at the National Institutes of Health, reported ``extraordinary'' progress in the search for a drug that will significantly prolong the lives of AIDS victims. ``But to someone who is suffering from a lethal disease who does not have a non-toxic drug that's available, those types of scientific advances ... really don't mean much,'' he said. ``There's a lot of despair out there and it's understandable because of the terrible scourge of this disease, but we in science are cautiously optimistic,'' he said. Fauci said it is unlikely that a ``penicillin equivalent'' will be found as a cure-all for AIDS. 
An earthquake of the type that killed tens of thousands last month in Soviet Armenia would cause many fewer deaths in a typical American city because of differences in construction standards, a U.S. engineer said Wednesday. Loring Wyllie, a San Francisco structural engineer and co-leader of an American team of experts that surveyed the Soviet earthquake site, said most of the buildings that collapsed were poorly constructed, built from a common design and of concrete that collapsed ``like a stack of cards.'' ``We would have a lot less loss of life due to the diversity of our construction,'' Wyllie said at a news conference. He said the Soviet buildings were constructed from blueprints developed in Moscow for use throughout the Soviet Union. Most of the destroyed buildings had been were built in recent years using prefabricated concrete parts ``not at all of the quality you would find here in the United States,'' he said. ``If that kind of construction happened on a job here in the United Stastes, the inspector would have rejected it and the contractor would have to redo it,'' said Wyllie. He said concrete used in the Soviet construction was ``frequently filled with rock pockets'' that weakened the material, and that concrete beams were often joined together in a haphazard fashion. As a result, when the earthquake struck, buildings up to 10 stories high collapsed very quickly, he said. Fred Krimgold, an expert from the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and a member of an American search and resuce team that arrived in Armenia four days after the earthquake, said the building design was a prime factor in the high number of deaths. ``The floor system of these buildings is made up of (concrete) planks,'' he said. ``When these floors collapsed, we got very tight, compact rubble'' with few voids where people might have survived. ``As a result, this was one of the most deadly earthquakes we've seen,'' said Krimgold. ``Typically, the ratio of injury to fatality is on the order of three or four to one. In this earthquake, it was the reverse.'' Krimgold said that though the official death toll of the earthquake has been placed at about 24,000, he believes the exact number will never be well-documented. Some Soviet officials, he said, estimated that there were more than 100,000 unregistered people living in the area and that thousands of bodies buried in the rubble will never be recovered. The rubble of many buildings that were thought to contain people, said Krimgold, now are simply being bulldozed level with no effort to recover bodies. ``There have been 24,000 bodies recovered,'' he said. ``But don't mistake the number of bodies found with the actual number of dead. ... Fifty to sixty thousand, probably 60, is a reasonable estimate.'' Krimgold, who has participated in rescue efforts following earthquakes in Mexico and Central America, said more people survived in those disasters because the buildings collapsed in large pieces. These large pieces left hollows or pockets within the rubble where trapped people could survive until they were rescued. Delays in reaching trapped Soviet victims also cost many lives, he said. ``We uncovered a number of people who unfortunately had died only recently before we got to them. They were not dead at the time of the collapse,'' said Krimgold. ``Many people died of exposure trapped in the buildings. The nighttime temperature was below freezing.'' The Armenian earthquake struck around 11:40 a.m. on Dec. 7. The main shock measured 6.8 on the Richter scale, which is considered a strong quake. It was followed a few minutes later by an after-shock that measured 5.8. About 80 percent of buildings in Leninakan, a town of 250,000, were leveled, and a number of smaller towns nearby were destroyed. John Filson, a U.S. Geological Survey expert and a co-leader of the American team, said after-shocks continue in the area with one measuring 5.0 occurring as recently as Saturday. Filson and Wyllie headed an 18-member team of specialists organized by the USGS, the National Academy of Sciences and the National Science Foundation at the request of Soviet authorities. The group spent two weeks in the Armenian earthquake area gathering scientific and engineering information in collaboration with Soviet experts. Filson said the information will be analyzed and shared internationally in an effort to better understand earthquakes and how to construct safer buildings in areas of seismic activity. 
The Customs Service said Wednesday it will classify imported sport utility vehicles like the Suzuki Samurai and most small vans as trucks, subjecting them to duty rates 10 times higher than those for cars. Deputy Customs Commissioner Michael Lane said that in the past, these vehicles sometimes had been classified as cars, upon which a 2.5 percent duty is imposed, and at other times as trucks, subject to a 25 percent duty. The deciding factor often was whether the vehicles were fitted with back seats and other amenities. Lane said auto industry officials have estimated the ruling could affect 100,000 to 250,000 or more vehicles, many of which will be switched from the car to truck category and could net the government hundreds of millions of dollars in higher tariffs. Wednesday's ruling specifically applied to Suzuki's Samurai and YOE, but Customs officers have been instructed to use the same standard in classifying other imported vehicles, the agency said. Chrysler Corp. spokesman Al Slechter said the automaker was ``ecstatic'' about the ruling. He said it would end manipulation of the tariff system and increase Treasury revenues. Suzuki spokeswoman Laura Segall said most Samurais already were being imported as trucks but that the company was ``disappointed'' the Customs Service had ruled against allowing some sport vehicles to be admitted as cars. Vehicles imported as trucks are not covered by the voluntary restraint agreement under which Japanese automakers limit the number of cars brought into the United States. 
Congress' budget agency said Wednesday that unless new taxes or spending cuts are approved, the federal deficit next year will be $141 billion, $14 billion higher than the White House estimates and well in excess of deficit-reduction goals. Releasing its forecast only days before President Reagan sends his final budget to Congress, the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office said it expects the deficits to decline only slightly in future years unless action is taken. By fiscal 1993, when Gramm-Rudman mandates a balanced budget, the federal deficit would still be $129 billion, based on current trends, the report said. The deficit during the current fiscal year will be about $155 billion, the same as last year, according to the CBO report. And it will drop only slightly next year, to $141 billion, if current government services are maintained with no new taxes. That means $41 billion in spending cuts or new revenues would be needed under the CBO projections to reduce the fiscal 1990 deficit to the $100 billion target in the budget balancing law. However, the administration, using more optimistic economic assumptions, is projecting a 1990 deficit of $127 billion, making it easier to hit the $100 billion deficit target required for Reagan's final budget. If president-elect George Bush and the Congress don't approve enough spending cuts or new taxes to get within $10 billion of the Gramm-Rudman goal, the law imposes automatic spending cuts across a broad swath of domestic and defense programs to take effect next October. Bush has said repeatedly he would cut the deficit without any new taxes. Leaders of the Democratic-controlled Congress have been skeptical of his approach, which he terms a ``flexible freeze'' on spending. President Reagan's $1.2 trillion budget, which goes to Congress next Monday, will propose spending cuts, asset sales and hikes in some user fees to reduce the deficit to $92.5 billion, Reagan's budget director, Joseph Wright, has said. The Congressional Budget Office provides Congress with many of its budget estimates as it considers spending legislation through the year. However, the Gramm-Rudman law is triggered by the figures provided by the president's Office of Management and Budget. The CBO deficit projections, compared to those made by the agency last August, are $7 billion higher for the current fiscal year and $5 billion higher for fiscal 1990. The key reason: the cost of shoring up the ailing savings and loan industry. The CBO deficit report was based on projections that the economy would continue a slow but steady growth of 2.2 percent in 1990 and 1991 and 2.3 percent in each of the next two years, with unemployment holding steady, inflation increasing slightly next year and interest rates gradually declining. House Budget Committee chairman Leon Panetta, D-Calif., said the CBO report was troubling because it may indicate the White House outlook was too sanguine. It that happens, deficit cutting efforts may be found inadequate as the new fiscal year approaches _ triggering Gramm-Rudman's automatic spending cuts. ``If the projections are overly optimistic now, that means reassessments could mean that we would face (automatic spending cuts) to make up the difference,'' he said. ``The more we use the rosy scenario approach, the more we lose touch with reality,'' he said. 
The Transportation Department announced new security requirements for airports Wednesday that will require tighter control over restricted areas, likely through the use of computerized identification cards for employees. The department said the new Federal Aviation Administration regulations will be phased in over the next 2{ years with the busiest airports required to comply by early 1991. Although airport operators will be allowed to meet the new security requirements through various ways, many are expected to use a computer-controlled identification card system to control access to restricted areas. The tighter regulations were proposed last March. The FAA estimates that 270 airports ultimately will have to install the computerized ID system or another method or procedure to provide a required level of security. FAA Administrator Allan McArtor said the new requirements will provide ``tighter control over employee ID cards, both in terms of who carries them and where an employee can and cannot go at an airport.'' He said the cards can be electronically coded to permit access only to those areas an employee is authorized to enter. A card also can be made ineffective if it is lost or the employee assigned the card quits without returning it. 
Libya's leader Col. Moammar Gadhafi asked Moscow to send part of its Mediterranean fleet to act as a buffer in a possible U.S.-Libyan confrontation, the Yugoslav news agency Tanjug reported Wednesday. Tanjug reported later that Tripoli residents jammed filling stations in a flight from the Libyan capital hours after hearing that U.S. warplanes shot down two Libyan fighter jets over the Mediterranean on Wednesday. It said Gadhafi's home was turned into a ``fortress,'' with anti-aircraft missiles mounted on its roof. The initial Tanjug report from Tripoli, which gave no source for its information, apparently was filed after the U.S. Defense Department announced the air incident. Tanjug said the news ``was neither confirmed nor denied in Libya.'' Tanjug, the official Yugoslav news agency, has its own correspondent in Tripoli and his reports have often proved reliable in the past. ``The Libyan leader (Gadhafi), reacting to the news about American movements in the Mediterranean, asked Moscow to send part of its Mediterranean fleet to the area of the forthcoming American maneuvers to avoid direct Libyan-American clashes, which could serve as an excuse for new American and possibly Israeli attacks on vital targets in Libya,'' Tanjug said. It did not specify which part of the Mediterranean Gadhafi had in mind, or say how many Soviet ships he wanted to see involved. In its later report, Tanjug said that ``only a few hours after'' the United States shot down the Libyan planes, ``migration of citizens from Tripoli was noticeable.'' Gas stations in Tripoli ``were jammed with cars, the same way as before the American attack'' on the North African nation in 1986, the agency said. Moments after the news of the incident, ``an avalanche of protests against `American aggression' struck Libya,'' with political activists calling for ``armed struggle'' against the United States, Tanjug said. Tanjug reported that Libya took heavy military precautions following word that U.S. fleet movements were under way in the Mediterranean. Gadhafi's residence in Tripoli has been turned into a ``fortress'' with new tank and anti-aircraft reinforcements and with French-built anti-aircraft missiles mounted on its roof, Tanjug reported. The agency said mobilization of Libya's reserve troops reportedly has been ordered and military aircraft based at airfields on the Mediterranean coast have been moved inland to points in the Sahara desert. In Tripoli, guns were mounted at key street intersections, and Gadhafi's personal guard took over traffic duties from police, Tanjug said. The correspondent also said, without identifying sources, that he learned that Col. Junis Jabber, the commander of Libya's armed forces, may have lost his job in a continuing reorganization of the radical Arab nation's military strength. 
Libya asked Wednesday that the Security Council hold an emergency meeting and condemn what it called U.S. aggression in shooting down two jet fighters it said were on an ``innocent'' reconnaissance mission. U.N. Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar issued a statement saying he ``regrets the incident and hopes both sides will exercise restraint so as not to heighten existing tension in the region.'' Libyan Ambassador Ali Sunni Muntasser met with Security Council President Ismail Razali of Malaysia and delivered a letter requesting the urgent session. The 15-member council scheduled informal consultations on the Libyan request for Thursday morning. ``Without a doubt, we ask for condemnation of this premeditated act of aggression,'' said Muntasser, the acting permanent representative. The planes, he said, were ``unarmed, on reconnaissance, ordinary, routine flying.'' ``It was an innocent flight,'' he said. He declined to say if Libya would retaliate, saying it wanted the Security Council ``to take its responsibility.'' In Washington, officials said U.S. Navy planes shot down the Libyan jet fighters over the Mediterranean Sea after the American aircraft were threatened while conducting routine operations in international airspace. The incident was the first fighting between the United States and Libya since American jets bombed Tripoli in 1986 and came after the United States charged that Libya had recently built a new chemical weapons plant. Although the Reagan administration has refused to rule out an attack on the plant, U.S. officials said the downing of the Libyan planes was unrelated to the dispute over the facility. At the United Nations, Muntasser said: ``I presented a letter from the Libyan government asking the Security Council to meet urgently to discuss this aggression of U.S. forces against two Libyan reconaissance planes on routine duty. They were attacked and shot down.'' ``We expect the whole international community to deplore this. We expect even the American people will. Yesterday it was threats, today it was acts.'' U.N. spokesman Francois Giuliani said Perez de Cuellar had been informed by both sides that official letters about the incident were being sent from Washington and Tripoli. Perez de Cuellar also met with U.S. Ambassador Herbert S. Okun, but details of their discussion were not disclosed. 
A federal appeals court panel Wednesday rejected a bid by Oliver L. North's attorneys to avoid showing prosecutors a summary of classified testimony the defense expects to present at the Iran-Contra trial. The U.S. Court of Appeals dissolved a temporary stay it issued Tuesday and denied a motion to permanently bar U.S. District Judge Gerhard Gesell from giving the office of independent counsel Lawrence Walsh a summary of proposed defense testimony that is classified. The request could have forced a delay in the trial, now set for Jan. 31. North's lawyers have said providing the 162-page summary to prosecutors would unfairly present them with information on North's defense and they petitioned the appeals court for a writ of mandamus. But in a two-page order, a three-judge appeals court panel said such a step ``is to be invoked only in extraordinary situations,'' adding that although North had raised ``serious claims that he will suffer deprivation of constitutional rights, he fails'' to satisfy the stringent legal standard for obtaining such relief. ``This court will not interrupt a criminal proceeding and invade the province of the district court when petitioner has an effective remedy through direct appeal from a final judgment of conviction,'' said the appeals court. The decision came as Walsh met with Attorney General Dick Thornburgh to discuss the continuing problems posed by classified documents in the case against the former National Security Council aide. Walsh, who said only that he had ``a very serious discussion'' with Thornburgh, was accompanied by aides who deal with the secrecy issue as well as John Keker, recently named the lead trial prosecutor in the North case. It was learned that Walsh sought the meeting with Thornburgh to discuss the implications of Gesell's refusal Tuesday to reconsider a Dec. 12 decision ordering the inclusion of certain sensitive references in 300 documents prosecutors want to use as trial exhibits. Walsh had asked Gesell to modify the order to accommodate concerns raised last month by intelligence agencies. Meanwhile, in a four-page memo filed Tuesday in federal court and publicly released Wednesday, North's attorneys reiterated their objections to being subjected to being limited to an ``arbitrary limit of 300 purportedly classified documents'' in a defense of North at his trial. The figure had been set Dec. 12 by Gesell. North's lawyers filed a narrowed-down list of 300 classified documents on Tuesday. ``There is no justification for such a restriction in this global case challenging aspects of three years of United States foreign policy,'' Brendan Sullivan and other North lawyers said in the memo. Walsh's office will be limited to using some 300 classified documents in prosecuting North. North has deemed some 3,500 documents to be relevant to his defense and the memo by his attorneys said the court's limitation is ``omitting thousands of other obviously relevant documents.'' North's attorneys said the defense should not be compelled to select its 300 documents when it is unclear what counts will be tried. The conspiracy and several other counts in the case are in jeopardy because the judge has directed more complete disclosure of information in classified documents than U.S. intelligence agencies appear willing to grant. U.S. intelligence agencies are concerned that sensitive references in the documents Walsh plans to use could disclose covert operations or secret dealings with foreign nations. Gesell said last month the administration had deleted too much material from classified documents the prosecution plans to use. The judge detailed what must be disclosed in order to give North a fair trial and Gesell on Tuesday rejected a request from Walsh to reconsider that order. Under the Classified Information Procedures Act, the attorney general can decide to seek dismissal of criminal charges to prevent disclosure of secrets that might endanger national security. In their memo, North's lawyers also said the court should have held a hearing to determine the relevance of the 3,500 documents and that the restriction of 300 documents compels North to identify for prosecutors the documents the defense plans to use without even knowing the substance of the testimony by the prosecution's witnesses. North also says he is entitled to know what information in the 3,500 documents he wants to use is classified and what is not classified. 
A woman reporting being molested in two attacks while walking home early on New Year's Day, police said Wednesday. ``As described by the victim, they were two separate happenings,'' Sgt. Robert Wolfgang said. The 41-year-old woman said she was first attacked while walking home from a tavern Sunday morning by a man who pulled her into a darkened doorway and sodomized her, Wolfgang said. After the first attacker fled, the woman resumed walking and then accepted an offer of a ride home from a motorist. She said she was driven to a vacant lot and raped, Wolfgang said. After the second attack, a motorist who saw her walking and crying took her to police. She was treated at Albany Medical Center and released. The woman described two men to police. Wolfgang said the woman had seen the first attacker in the bar she was in earlier, but did not know either man. He said police have no suspects. 
The official death toll stands at two, but six other crewmen from a container ship that sank last week have joined thousands of people lost at sea who never get a final resting place. ``The search stays indefinitely in a suspended mode,'' U.S. Coast Guard Petty Officer Ellen Marie Harrington said Wednesday. ``And that's difficult because part of the grieving process is tied up in having some sort of memorial or burial service.'' After the 254-foot ship sank in 25-foot seas on its journey from Port Elizabeth, N.J., to Bermuda, five crewmen were plucked from the water, two of whom died. Six crew members were still missing Wednesday and presumed dead, the Coast Guard said. ``You race out there with hopes of making a rescue and then for one reason or another it doesn't happen. As time goes on there's a definite psychological letdown because you start to edge toward the reality of the conditions and the challenge,'' said Lt. Jonathan Trumble. ``That's when you finally have to leave and go home empty-handed or with corpses.'' ``When we do have a successful search, there's a feeling that, well, we kind of stole one from the ocean this time,'' he said. Trumble was heading the Coast Guard's command post in Boston when distress signals came in from the Lloyd Bermuda, which was about 200 miles off the coast of New Jersey. Violent seas and a sudden shift of cargo sent crewmen racing to unlash the ship's life rafts. Trumble said air and naval rescue teams mobilized with optimism. ``When they go out, there's a 100 percent chance of finding them. We had high hopes that all 11 men were in life rafts, but as the case wore on those odds decreased considerably,'' he said. ``Then there's a real stomach-wrenching feeling. There's a real gut feeling when you finally have to say `Look, we've done everything we possibly could do ... and I call them home.' '' The Rev. Barbara Crafton, a minister at the Seamen's Church in Port Newark, N.J., said it is with the search's suspension that families begin a troubled mourning process. ``The grieving process is denied these families,'' she said. ``From the pastoral point of view there is a closure when you have in fact seen the body of the one you loved, as painful as it is. ``In dealing with widows of seafarers, those whose husbands are lost and never seen again get stuck in uncertainty,'' she added. ``They know intellectually he's dead, but emotionally there is a lack of acceptance.'' About 25 people attended a memorial service Friday at the Seamen's Church, a regular gathering place for the Lloyd Bermuda's crew members and other seafarers passing through the port city. ``(A memorial) isn't much, but it is something concrete that certifies in an emotional way that this man's life is over and that this is a life that had meaning,'' she said. During the past decade, an average 79 seafarers on American vessels have been listed annually as lost and presumed dead at sea, said Coast Guard Cmdr. Tom Purtell of the Marine Safety Evaluation branch in Washington, D.C. 
The Supreme Court on Wednesday rejected a Palestinian's request that he be freed until a decision is made on whether he should be sent to the United States to stand trial for blowing up a plane. Mohammed Rashid is accused of bombing of a Pan Am jetliner over Hawaii in 1982, killing a 15-year-old Japanese boy dead and injuring 15 people. The court said he may flee the country if he is freed before a final decision on the U.S. request for his extradition. No date has been set for Rashid's next extradition hearing, which has been delayed for months on the grounds that the United States has failed to provide enough evidence and documents to implicate Rashid in the bombing. Rashid, 39, was arrested at Athens Airport by Greek police following a tip by U.S. Embassy officials last year. He was sentenced to jail for seven months for possessing a false passport. The extradition request is viewed as a test of Greece's willingness to crack down on terrorism. A group of U.S. congressmen have introduced legislation calling on the Greek government to extradite Rashid, who officials say may have information regarding the Pan Am bombing over Scotland two weeks ago. The congressional resolution, which will be voted on by the U.S. House in coming weeks, also condemned Greece's socialist government for freeing a Palestinian charged with the 1982 bombing of a Rome synagogue. Italy had demanded the extradition of Abdel Osama Zomar, who was held in a Greek jail for six years before he was permitted to leave aboard a plane for Libya. 
Here is a summary of developments related to the United States' downing of two Libyan jet fighters Wednesday over the Mediterranean Sea: 
Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci said two U.S. Navy F-14 Tomcat jet fighters shot down two Libyan MiG-23 jets after the Americans were approached in ``a hostile manner'' in international airspace. Carlucci said the American jets acted in self-defense, opening fire with air-to-air missiles only after the Soviet-built Libyan jets activated their weapon-targeting radar. Carlucci denied that the jets were airborne to participate in a military strike on a disputed chemical weapons production plant inside Libya. The U.S. planes returned to their carrier, the USS John F. Kennedy. The fate of the Libyan pilots was unclear, although Carlucci said ``two parachutes were sighted'' and a rescue helicopter was seen in the area. 
Libya claimed the destruction of the Libyan fighters was a premeditated attack, and Col. Moammar Gadhafi declared his nation would ``meet challenge with challenge.'' The Yugoslav news agency Tanjug reported that Gadhafi asked the Soviet Union to send part of its Mediterranean fleet to act as a buffer in a possible US-Libyan confrontation. Tanjug also said mobilization of Libya's reserve troops was ordered while military aircraft based on the Mediterranean coast were moved inland. 
European officials reacted cautiously to the incident, but Israel applauded the move and offered to take diplomatic steps aimed at closing Libya's suspected chemical weapons plant. PLO leader Yasser Arafat and the Arab League sharply criticized the attack. ``It will affect negatively the Middle East peace process,'' Arafat said, and the Arab League's secretary general, Chidli Klibi, demanded that the United States end acts of ``provocation near the Libyan coasts.'' Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's spokesman, Avi Pazner, said: ``Based on previous Libyan behavior, we have no reason to doubt the official American explanation of this incident.'' 
Libya requested an emergency meeting of the Security Council to condemn what it called U.S. aggression in the shooting down of its ``innocent'' reconnaissance jets. U.N. Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar issued a statement saying he ``regrets the incident and hopes both sides will exercise restraint so as not to heighten existing tension in the region.'' 
President Reagan was awakened about an hour after the incident, in contrast to a similar incident in 1981 when he was not told for more than six hours. White House spokesman Roman Popadiuk said the president was informed of the shooting at 2:53 a.m. PST, and he had no information on the president's reaction, except to say, ``The president . . . considers the incident closed.'' 
In Zurich, the U.S. dollar closed sharply higher in interbank trading and one dealer who did not want to be identified said the rise was in reaction to the U.S.-Libyan confrontation. The dollar always gains strength in times of international tension, he said. 
President-elect Bush, savoring his 40-state 1988 victory anew, announced to a joint session of Congress on Wednesday the official results of his own presidential election triumph. ``This announcement shall be deemed a sufficient declaration of the persons elected president and vice president of the United States,'' Bush intoned as he presided over a House-Senate session called to certify results of the Electoral College ballots cast last month. It had been 152 years since a vice president had been able to peform such a task. Grinning broadly, Bush rapped the gavel and declared ``the joint session dissolved.'' It was his final expected official act as the constitutional presiding officer of the Senate. And it marked the first time a vice president had been able to preside over his own presidential election certification since Martin Van Buren did so in 1837. In a closely orchestrated session in the House chamber, the vice president proclaimed that ``George Bush of the state of Texas'' had received 426 electoral votes to Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis' 111 votes. Democratic vice presidential candidate Lloyd Bentsen got one vote, filed in protest of the Electoral College system by one elector. The session was called under a provision of the Constitution which gives Congress the job of passing final judgment on the authenticity of each state's electoral tally. After announcing the outcome, Bush shook hands with House Speaker Jim Wright, D-Texas, and was given a standing ovation by members of the House and Senate. Then he phoned Vice President-elect Dan Quayle of Indiana to notify him. Quayle did not attend the vote-counting ceremony, his spokesman said, because he had no official role and thought it more important to work on hiring his staff and on plans for the inauguration on Jan. 20. ``He didn't want to go. It would have just been a photo op,'' said press secretary Dave Beckwith. On another subject, Bush spokeswoman Sheila Tate said the vice president had been notified at 6 a.m. of the U.S. Navy's attack on two Libyan fighter planes over the Mediterranean and ``he's been kept informed'' throughout the day. Bush also was reported to be nearing an announcement of his choice for energy secretary. However, Bush transition sources said James Schlesinger, who held that job during the Carter administration, ias no longer viewed as a serious contender for the post. The vice president and Schlesinger met last week to talk about energy releated issues but ``the job was not offered,'' said a senior Bush transition official who spoke on the condition of anonymity. Sources close to Bush said he still hasn't made up his mind on the post but former Louisiana Rep. Henson Moore, a longtime friend of the vice president's, was a leading candidate. Rep. Robert Dorman, R-Calif., had a private lunch with Bush in the Senate dining room before Wednesday's electoral vote couuting. Dornan, an early congressional supporter of Bush's, said they discussed both the energy post and the other unfilled Cabinet-level post, that of so-called drug czar, over turkey sandwiches. Dornan said Bush did not divulge his choice in either instance. The congressman said he told Bush his own favorite for the drug post was former education secretary Bill Bennett, who also has the support of some top-level Bush advisers. Sources close to Bush also said Texas industrialist Ross Perot is also on a short list of possible contenders for the drug job. The vice president has only two top-level posts to fill: the energy job and the ``drug czar.'' With the election outcome known well in advance, Bush carried out his constitutional role according to a script that made up in ritual and tradition what it lacked in suspense. Papers certifying each state's electoral ballots, sealed in manila envelopes in two large brass-bound wooden boxes, were carried in by pages. Under Bush's direction, four members of Congress designated as counters _ Sens. Ted Stevens, R-Alaska, and Wendell Ford, D-Ky., and Reps. Bill Frenzel, R-Minn., and Frank Annunzio, D-Ill. _ read the results alphabetically, state by state. Each ballot was pronounced ``regular in form and authentic.'' The lone presidential vote for Bentsen came from West Virginia, carried by Dukakis. Elector Margarette Leach flipped her ballot, voting for Bensten for president and casting her vice presidential ballot for Dukakis. That, Ford observed when he read the West Virginia tally, was ``exercising the prerogative of the Electoral College.'' Bush injected a note of humor at one point in the roll call, when Annunzio said only that Arkansas had cast six votes for president. ``The chair wonders who won that one.'' As the chamber erupted in laughter and applause, Annunzio responded, ``It's obvious that they all know the answer to that one.'' While on Capitol Hill, Bush met privately with Sens. Jesse Helms, R-N.C., and Larry Pressler, R-S.D., in separate sessions. They discussed ``issues of mutual concerns,'' said Bush spokeswoman Alixe Glen. 
Jewish groups expressed outrage Wednesday at the reported involvement of a West German company in Libya's suspected chemical weapons production, saying the country that gassed millions of Jews bears responsibility for preventing the production of such arms. The groups said they were also investigating whether companies in other countries had provided help for Libya's chemical weapons plant, and would protest to those countries once their findings are complete. The United States has said a West German company, along with firms in Japan and Italy, supplied technology and expertise for the Libyan plant located 35 miles southwest of Tripoli. Swiss, Japanese and South Korean firms were also reportedly involved in building what Libya contends is a pharmaceutical factory. U.S. officials told West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl last December that a company called Imhausen-Chemie was one of those helping Libya. But Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher said Wednesday his country's investigation had not found any involvement by the company in the plant. The director of the Simon Wiesenthal Center, a non-profit organization which hunts surviving Nazi criminals around the world, said Kohl's office told him Imhausen-Chemie had not applied for an export license to Libya. Rabbi Marvin Heir said the deputy director of Kohl's office, Stepan Eisel, told him in a telephone conversation Tuesday that if investigators determine the company had exported material to Libya without permission, it would be prosecuted. Heir said he had sent Kohl a telegram to express his ``shock.'' ``The idea of German firms helping Moammar Gadhafi, the foe of Israel and a dangerous enemy of the world, is repugnant to Jews, especially because of the Holocaust,'' Rabbi Heir said. ``It is an unforgivable act that should be harshly punished,'' he added in an interview. ``It's part of Germany's responsibility to atone for the past by preventing chemical warfare from ever happening again,'' Heir said. Israel Singer, Secretary-General of the World Jewish Congress, said his group was ``making representations to several governments to express our deep concern and profound anxiety at this volatile and dangerous situation.'' The WJC declined to elaborate. 
Two funeral parlors ran out of coffins on Wednesday and four more bodies were pulled from the waters by this grieving port town, raising to 83 the number of people killed when a ferry sank on New Year's Day. The skipper of the craft has been jailed and President Vinicio Cerezo's administration has ordered an investigation into the worst maritime tragedy in Guatemala's history. The Justo Rufino Barrios II evidently developed engine trouble halfway on a 16-mile run from Livingston to Puerto Barros, 187 miles northeast of Guatemala City. A navy patrol boat came to its assistance and offered a tow, but survivors said the cable was too short and the patrol boat sank the ferry when it suddenly accelerated. Survivors, including the captain, accused the crewmen of the naval craft of being drunk and swamping the craft. Navy officials insisted the ferry was overcrowded. ``They are trying to put the blame on me so as to remain blameless themselves,'' Juan Pablo Esquivel, the 22-year-old ferry captain, said in a jailhouse interview. Esquivel could face up to 10 years in prison for negligence in the disaster. Over 160 people, including about 40 children, were on the ferry when it went down, according to officials here. Officials said its official capacity was 90 passengers. Four bodies were recovered from Amatique Bay on Wednesday, raising the death toll to 83. None of the survivors interviewed alleged malice on the part of navy crew. But Esquivel, who has been arrested on charges of criminal negligence, said he doubted the navy would accept any responsibility. Esquivel, interviewed Tuesday night, said the patrol boat's crew was celebrating the new year on deck when it arrived to help the ferry. ``They were in a state of drunkenness,'' Esquivel claimed. He said a navy machinist who came on board the ferry to check the engine smelled strongly of alcohol. Isaac Acevedo, another survivor, was quoted by the local newspaper as saying, ``They (the navy crewmen) were drunk and gave us a very brusque pull.'' Capt. Anibal Giron, deputy commander of the Puerto Barrios naval base and a graduate of the U.S. Coast Guard Academy, denied Wednesday that anyone was drunk on the navy boat. Esquivel said he asked the patrol boat skipper to take on half his ferry passengers before beginning the tow, but that the skipper denied the request. Giron said the approaching dusk and the difference in deck levels made a transfer impossible. Grieving townspeople continued showing up at La Milagrosa and Estrada, the town's two funeral homes. Stands that normally hold varnished wooden caskets were bare and carpenters were building rough-hewn pine coffins to meet the demand. Rodolfo Lucano, administrator of the ferry service, said 150 passengers was a safe load for the 60-foot ferry. Esquivel said he was aware there were 100 adults, but said more could have come on board without his knowledge. ``Even if it were overloaded that is not going to make it capsize. What made it capsize was a a bad tow,'' Lucano said. 
Officials in Armenia and Azerbaijan on Wednesday appealed to refugees who fled ethnic violence to return home and promised severe punishment for those who instigated attacks that left at least 31 people dead. ``Throw aside all hesitations and doubts. Your neighbors, friends, comrades in work and study are waiting for you,'' said a statement distributed by the Tass news agency. ``All those who encroached on the brotherhood of the people, who expelled families, persecuted people on account of their nationality, will be punished in accordance with all the strictness of the law,'' it said. Tass said the statement from the Communist parties and governments of the neighboring southern republics was published Wednesday in the official press. According to official reports, about 180,000 people fled across the border to their ethnic homeland to escape the violence erupting in mid-November. In the past month, official reports have said that some of the refugees had returned home, but no numbers have been given. The appeal said the migration had attained ``enormous proportions.'' Both small republics have responsibility for feeding and housing refugees. That is especially difficult for Armenia, which also is struggling with the effects of the Dec. 7 earthquake that devastated its northern cities. The dispute between the republics began in February when Armenians began agitating for annexation of the Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan, which is dominated by ethnic Armenians. Violence has broken out several times since then, and more than 60 people are known to have been killed. Azerbaijan and central authorities in Moscow have rejected Armenia's demand for annexation. The government newspaper Izvestia said Wednesday that 75 criminal cases began in Armenia before Nov. 22 and that 70 began after that date. It said the later cases included murders, assaults, robberies, and intentional destruction of personal property. Izvestia also said some local officials were fired for failing to keep the peace. It said two police officers in the Gugar region of Armenia, where eight Azerbaijanis were killed in the most recent violence, had been fired and a criminal investigation was under way against one of them. 
Police said Wednesday they reopened investigations into the 1966 prison escape to Moscow of George Blake, a Briton who became a key Soviet spy, after two British anti-nuclear campaigners said they helped free Blake. Michael Randle, a former researcher in ``peace studies'' at Bradford University in northern England, and London antiques dealer Pat Pottle attracted new attention with plans to publish a book about how they helped free Blake. ``We do feel that we were right to do what we did, and all our reasoning will be in our book which is published in June,'' Randle, 54, told reporters Wednesday. In London, a spokeswoman at Scotland Yard police headquarters said the office of the Director of Public Prosecutions asked police to reopen investigations. ``This we have done, but we can give no further details,'' she said, speaking on condition she was not identified. Blake, now 65 and the only surviving major British traitor known to be in the Soviet Union, was sentenced in 1962 to 42 years imprisonment in a highly publicized case. The 42 years were for the 42 British agents prosecutors said the Dutch-born Blake betrayed to their deaths. Blake escaped from London's Wormwood Scrubs prison after serving less than five years. In a Soviet television interview last April, he said he hid in an apartment near the prison for a few days, hid in another for two months and then was smuggled from Britain to the Soviet Union by way of East Berlin. Blake, who married in the Soviet Union, painted an idyllic picture of life in Moscow. The names of Randle and Pottle have been linked previously to the Blake escape in newspaper stories. But their book, titled ``The Blake Escape: How We Freed George Blake and Why'' appears to promise the first full account. Camilla Nicholls, spokeswoman for the book's British publishers, Harrap Ltd., said lawyers have told the company that publication is not illegal. It is illegal to profit from criminal acts. ``We are advised the writing of the book is not a criminal act,'' said Ms. Nicholls. Randle said he and Pottle expected to be questioned by police. ``We are prepared to go to jail if necessary,'' he said. ``We feel that our decision was a right one and we have always been prepared to take the consequences.'' 
The chief Kremlin negotiator on Afghanistan said Wednesday he is not certain that Soviet troops will withdraw on schedule if Moslem guerrillas keep fighting the communist Afghan regime. Under a U.N.-mediated agreement, Soviet soldiers began leaving Afghanistan on May 15, 1988, half were out by Aug. 15 and the remaining 50,000 are to be gone by Feb. 15. The guerrillas, not parties to the agreement, have continued the war. Yuli Vorontsov, Soviet deputy foreign minister and ambassador to Afghanistan, told reporters when he arrived in Islamabad on Wednesday: ``If the cease-fire holds and there is no fighting in Afghanistan, then that's a very good situation for Soviet forces to leave.'' When asked what would happen to the withdrawal plans if the insurgency continued, he said, ``We shall see, all of us. I don't know.'' Guerrillas have rejected the Soviet-backed government's offer of a coalition and are ignoring a unilateral cease-fire it proclaimed, which began Jan. 1. Vorontsov is expected to meet insurgent leaders Thursday in Moscow's search for a political solution to the civil war that began after a communist coup in April 1978. Soviet soldiers entered Afghanistan in December 1979 and totaled an estimated 115,000 when the withdrawal agreement was signed April 14 in Geneva. The Soviet envoy held meetings in Saudi Arabia a month ago with guerrilla leaders based in Pakistan, and conferred in Tehran earlier this week with others based in Iran. About 5.5 million Afghans, one-third of the population, have fled since the war began, nearly all to Pakistan and Iran, Afghanistan's neighbors on the east and west. Guerrillas use border towns and refugee camps as bases and supply points. Pakistan and the United States provide most of the insurgents' arms and financial support. Guerrilla sources in Islamabad said representatives of fighters operating from Iran were expected to arrive Thursday to join the talks with Vorontsov. Vorontsov said he was prepared to meet with the guerrillas, ``but they were not ready yet before I came here.'' A guerrilla source said privately the resistance leaders from Iran and Pakistan probably would confer with each other before meeting Vorontsov and whether they would see him jointly or separately had not been decided. Vorontsov is trying to work out arrangements that will allow all Soviet forces to leave by the deadline without being attacked along the way. The Kremlin has acknowledged the loss of at least 13,300 soldiers in the war. He met with Foreign Minister Sahabzada Yaqub Khan soon after arrival but would not reveal the substance. He told The Associated Press as he left the meeting, ``The talks were very interesting and very useful,'' and when asked to elaborate said, ``We talked about oviet-Pakistan relations and Afghanistan.'' Humayun Khan of the Foreign Ministry told the AP: ``Both sides are trying to work toward a political solution.'' Western diplomats said Tuesday that Soviet troops were withdrawing from Shindand and Herat in western Afghanistan. They also said Soviet civilian advisers were leaving Kabul en masse and quoted Afghan officials as saying the main Red Army departure from the capital would begin Jan. 15. Sibghatullah Mojaddidi, who took over Jan. 1 as chairman of the seven-party guerrilla alliance based in Pakistan, told reporters Tuesday he expected to meet Vorontsov on Friday, but guerrilla sources say some alliance members want no more discussions with the Soviets. Meeting with guerrilas is a tacit acknowledgment Moscow is exploring a non-communist alternative, but Vorontsov refused on Wednesday to write off the Kremlin's allies in Kabul as participants in a future government. The ruling Marxists ``will survive by all means ... but they are willing to participate in the creation of a broad-based government,'' he said. The government in Kabul is led by President Najib. Factions in the Pakistan-based guerrilla alliance are divided on many issues, but agree Najib's regime cannot have a role in postwar Afghanistan. They contend his government will collapse without Soviet military help, but Vorontsov called that ``a big mistake ... wishful thinking.'' Mojaddidi announced Tuesday 400-member council would convene within three weeks with the task of forming a transitional government. 
A Soviet television news program on Wednesday promised viewers a report on 17 Armenian earthquake survivors surviving nearly a month under the rubble of a grain elevator, but failed to show the story. Editors of ``Vremya'' could not explain why the report, apparently the same one denied a day earlier by Soviet officials, was not shown on the program. ``Seventeen people survived almost a month under the ruins of an elevator. We expect a report about this,'' announcer Anna Shatilova said at the beginning of the nightly news program, which is watched by tens of millions of viewers. In a report about the visit of Leningrad Communist Party leader Yuri Solovyev to the earthquake-devastated city of Leninakan, ``Vremya'' showed a brief picture of rescue worker Sasha Ivanov from Leningrad. ``Today, Leningrad resident Sasha Ivanov, who saved the lives of 17 people, as hundreds of his comrades from all corners of the Soviet Union, was raising a new Leninakan,'' the report said. It showed the young, mustachioed Ivanov for only a couple of seconds in a report of several minutes and said nothing about when or how he saved the people. Hundreds of people were pulled alive from the wreckage of Leninakan and other cities following the Dec. 7 quake. But the official Tass news agency on Tuesday quoted Norik Muradyan, head of the relief effort in the devastated city of Spitak, as saying the last survivor had been rescued there 10 days ago. The Tass report was a denial of a story Monday by a French radio station that 17 people had been rescued from a collapsed grain elevator in Spitak. It said they had survived for more than three weeks by eating grain and drinking melted snow. ``Vremya'' editors could not explain the confusion. ``You saw everything on the screen that we received from Yerevan,'' said the duty editor in charge of the program. The editor, who spoke in a telephone conversation with The Associated Press on condition he not be identified, said Ms. Shatilova's announcement at the beginning of the program could have referred to the report about Ivanov, or that film crews in Yerevan perhaps had not had enough time to put together a report. Editors at Tass in Moscow and at the official Armenpress news agency in Armenia said they had no information to verify that 17 people were rescued from a collapsed elevator. Telephones at government offices and the Red Cross in Yerevan did not answer Wednesday night. 
Congressional leaders said Wednesday the United States acted appropriately in shooting down two Libyan fighters as they accepted the Reagan administration's denial that U.S. forces planned to attack a purported Libyan chemical weapons factory. Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci told a Pentagon news conference the commander of the F-14 patrol made the decision to fire at the Libyan aircraft ``in self-defense'' and apparently shot down both planes. Carlucci also denied the two American F-14s and their host aircraft carrier, the USS John F. Kennedy, were in the area with the intention of attacking the what the United States says is a chemical weapons factory. Members of the House and Senate were nearly unanimous in their support for the U.S. action, and legislators emerging from afternoon briefings by the Joint Chiefs of Staff expressed their satisfaction with the administration's explanation. Sen. Sam Nunn, D-Ga., chairman of the Armed Services Committee, said the American jets were acting defensively because the Libyan planes ``had maneuvered themselves into a position of attack _ and they did it on two occasions.'' ``That violates the rules of engagement that we have common understanding on in the international environment,'' Nunn said. ``You cannot, in this day and time and modern technology, wait until another plane has fired in order to defend yourself. It's too late then.'' Nunn, who was contacted by Adm. William Crowe, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and later attended one of the briefings, said he was reassured there was no connection between the incident and the chemical weapons plant. ``I've talked to Admiral Crowe about that and I've gotten an emphatic no _ no connection in terms of what the American ship was doing,'' Nunn said. ``The action took place 45-50 miles away from shore. It wasn't even in the approximate region of that chemical plant. ``So from the American point of view _ everything I know indicates that there was no connection between what the ship or planes were doing and our concern about the chemical plant in Libya,'' he said. Rep. Les Aspin, chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, said that based on information from the briefing, ``everything that we've done was appropriate.'' Aspin said he believes the administration's contention that U.S. forces were conducting routine operations in the Mediterranean Sea and suggested that Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi provoked the incident. ``Gadhafi was looking for a little bit of a dust-up with the United States,'' Aspin said. House Majority Whip Tony Coelho, D-Calif., said the ``information presently available indicates our pilots acted defensively, and well within the rules of engagement.'' ``Congress should be informed, however, if the United States is engaged in a piecemeal escalation of our conflict with Libya beyond these legitimate acts of self-defense,'' Coelho said. Sen. Christopher Dodd, D-Conn., a member of the Foreign Relations Committee, said the U.S. pilots were ``provoked _ and they responded decisively and correctly.'' House Speaker Jim Wright, D-Texas, said the American pilots ``had reason to believe they were under attack and they were acting in self-defense.'' Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole, R-Kan., said the downing of the two Libyan jets _ the first battle between the United States and Libya since American jets bombed Tripoli in April 1986 _ appears to be ``self-defense _ pure and simple.'' ``Gadhafi never learns,'' Dole said. ``Maybe this time he will finally get it straight: Whenever he threatens American forces, we will defend ourselves.'' Libya's construction of a chemical weapons factory exacerbated the already volatile relationship between the United States and Libya. U.S. officials said Tuesday they had evidence the plant had started producing limited quantities of chemical weapons and has conducted trial runs of its production equipment. Libya has claimed the plant will make pharmaceuticals and offered to let international experts inspect the facility. The United States claimed the offer was inadequate. Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., a member of the Armed Services Committee, said early reports indicate that the U.S. action ``was warranted in that when an aircraft locks onto another aircraft with its radar it then has the capability of launching a missile, a radar-guided missile.'' Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, R-N.Y., said the American jets took the proper action and indicated that some U.S. action against the chemical plant may be necessary. ``Under no circumstances would we countenance them letting the genie out of the bottle in terms of chemical warfare and if necessary, we would destroy that facility,'' D'Amato told reporters in Albany, N.Y. Sen. Tim Wirth, D-Colo., a member of the Armed Services Committee, said the U.S. jets were justified in defending themselves. ``The technology involved in modern combat doesn't allow much time to verify an attack _ one missile fired from beyond visual range is all that is necessary to destroy a plane or ship,'' Wirth said. ``In areas of high tension as in the Gulf or near Libya every action must be regarded as potentially harmful,'' he said. Sen. Alan J. Dixon, D-Ill., chairman of the Armed Services subcommittee on readiness, sustainability and support said the United States ``did exactly what we should have done. ... Those of us who have looked into it approve of what occurred.'' 
European officials reacted cautiously to the U.S. downing of two Libyan jet fighters Wednesday, Arab countries sharply criticized the incident and Israel applauded the move. Government spokesmen in West Germany, Britain, France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands and Greece declined immediately to support or condemn the incident in which two U.S. jets shot down the fighters in a dogfight off the Libyan coast. Soviet media rapidly reported the incident, but the government had no immediate comment. The official news agency Tass, reporting Libya's call for an emergency Arab League meeting on the matter, termed the shooting ``U.S. aggression against Libya.'' PLO leader Yasser Arafat called the incident ``very serious.'' ``It will affect negatively the Middle East peace process,'' the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization told Cable News Network in an interview from Cairo, Egypt. Chedli Klibi, the Arab League's secretary general, demanded the United States end acts of ``provocation near the Libyan coasts.'' Speaking from Tunisia, which borders Libya, he said the attack constitutes an ``extremely serious aggression'' dictated by a ``false perception by the United States of its role in regulating international problems.'' He said any escalation would have ``negative consequences'' on U.S.-Arab relations. A White House spokesman said two of Libya's Soviet-built MiG-23s were shot down by U.S. F-14s about 40 miles off the Libyan coast after the American aircraft were ``threatened while conducting routine operations.'' The U.S. jets returned safely to the aircraft carrier John F. Kennedy, the Navy reported. Tensions between Libya and the United States had escalated over reports that the government of Col. Moammar Gadhafi built a chemical weapons plant. In Syria, state-run television called the incident ``a flagrant U.S. aggression.'' Iran's Foreign Ministry called the U.S. action a violation of Libya's sovereignty and said the attack would have ``dangerous consequences.'' Syria and Libya were Iran's only allies in the eight-year Iran-Iraq war. Iraq denounced the downing of the Libyan jets and accused the U.S. of acting irresponsibly. In Jerusalem, Finance Minister Shimon Peres said, ``We congratulate the American Navy for shooting down two planes that were threatening it.'' Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's spokesman, Avi Pazner, said: ``Based on previous Libyan behavior, we have no reason to doubt the official American explanation of this incident.'' Deputy Foreign Minister Benjamin Netanyahu said Israel has evidence that Libya is capable of producing chemical weapons and vowed to take action. ``We have unequivocal reports about plants built to produce chemical weapons, not only in Libya, but in other countries including those very close to us,'' Netanyahu said in an address to Israel's parliament. ``There is a series of measures Israel is going to undertake,'' Netanyahu said. This will include proposals of economic and political sanctions against Libya, Israel radio reported. Michael Mates of Britain's governing Conservative Party and chairman of the parliamentary committee on defense said the Libyans got what they deserved. ``If the Libyans have made an offensive gesture toward the United States, I'm not surprised they've been shot down, because they're not a friendly nation, they have committed many aggressive acts against the United States,'' he told the British Broadcasting Corp. A West German Foreign Ministry spokesman, Hanns Schumacher, declined to comment on the downing of the jets, and said Bonn was not officially informed of the action. French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas said his country ``hopes that tension in the Mediterranean does not increase'' as a result of Wednesday's incident. ``It is still too early to know the exact circumstances of the incident,'' Dumas said. French President Francois Mitterrand has called an international conference for Jan. 7-11 to discuss expanding a 1925 treaty banning the use of chemical weapons. Dumas said he hoped the incident would not dominate the forum. The Italian government expressed ``deep concern'' about the shooting. Premier Ciriaco De Mita's office said the incident would be discussed at a previously scheduled Cabinet meeting Thursday. In Spain, Foreign Ministry spokesman Juan Lena said, ``The Spanish government considers with serious concern any kind of measure that leads to an increase in tension in the Mediterranean.'' The Dutch govt ``regrets'' the incident and voices its ``great concern,'' said a Foreign Ministry spokesman. A Greek government spokesman said his country believes that both sides ``at this moment should cool it and avoid actions that would endanger peace in this sensitive region.'' In Athens, about 3,000 leftist demonstrators chanting anti-U.S. slogans marched to the U.S. Embassy Wednesday night to protest the incident. In Zurich, the dollar closed sharply higher in interbank trading and one dealer who did not want to be identified said the rise was in reaction to the U.S.-Libyan confrontation. The dollar always gains strength in times of international tension, he said. 
, WASHINGTON (AP) _ The Department of Energy estimated Wednesday it may take $91 billion to $200 billion over 60 years to clean up radioactive and chemical contamination at 45 government civilian and military nuclear plants around the country. In a report to Sen. John Glenn, D-Ohio, the energy department said the work to be done includes cleaning up soil, surface and ground water, including removal, treatment and disposal of bulk wastes. Glenn, at a news conference, urged the Reagan and Bush administrations to commit significant resources to the job. Chairman of the Senate Government Affairs Committee, Glenn said the situation at 17 nuclear facilities is so serious it represents ``nothing less than an environmental time bomb.'' ``It's up to the White House to ask for enough money to defuse that bomb before it explodes,'' Glenn said. ``The acid test of our government's commitment to cleaning up these facilities does not lie in this report, but in the amount of money that is actually budgeted and spent for cleanup. ``Campaign rhetoric, promises and good intentions will not do the job,'' he said. ``We've waited too long already to start this job. We simply cannot afford to wait any longer.'' Glenn said his committee will open hearings early in the year to examine the energy department report and two others soon to be issued. They include a follow-up report on the cost of clean up at each specific nuclear site and the so-called ``2010 study'' which is to examine goals for nuclear weapons production and facilities in the year 2010. Glenn said the latter reports should be issued over the next few weeks. Glenn said he is concerned that insufficient funds for the cleanup job will be included in the budget being prepared by the Office of Management and Budget and added: ``The main thing is, will they have guts enough to put this in the new budget?'' He said that he understands that OMB is considering proposing spending of about $1.4 billion for the fiscal year beginning next Oct. 1 but asserted that it will take at least $1.8 billion ``to just keep up.'' ``As far as I'm concerned, $1.4 billion is completely inadequate,'' he said. Glenn said that while spending in the magnitude of some $6 billion a year is clearly called for, he believes a good start can be made with a cleanup program costing $3.5 billion to $4 billion a year. ``It's not going to get any cheaper,'' Glenn said. ``We know it has to be done. Let's get on with it.'' 
PLO chairman Yasser Arafat told a cheering crowd Wednesday the Palestinian uprising in Israeli-occupied territories made his peace efforts possible. He said was able to propose ``peace from a position of strength'' because of the 13-month-old rebellion in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, and hinted at withdrawing the offer if Israel does not agree to talk with the PLO. Arafat went to the rally from an hour-long meeting with President Hosni Mubarak. The Palestine Liberation Organization chief addressed the U.N. General Assembly in Geneva last month, recognized Israel and renounced terrorism. The Palestine National Council, which acts as the PLO legislature, declared an independent Palestinian state in November. Arafat, wearing his customary military fatigues, checkered headgear and holstered pistol, spoke to a rally Wednesday of about 1,000 people organized by the Federation of Labor Unions to honor the Palestinian revolt that began Dec. 8, 1987. Most were workers, officials and political party officialss. ``People now are paying attention to (peace) offers we had made previously because of the intefadeh and its economic danger to Israel,'' he said, using the Arabic word for uprising by which the rebellion has become known. After Arafat made his declarations in Geneva, the United States opened contacts with the PLO, which it had refused to do previously. Arafat did not mention the United States on Wednesday, but criticized Israel's continued refusal to deal with him. ``I don't expect Israel to accept peace easily or to give in easily,'' he said. ``It is a state established by war. The maximum acceptable to it is a state of no-peace-no-war. But I tell them the state of no-peace-no-war has come to an end.'' He pledged to continue pursuing peace, but repeated an earlier warning that, if the Israelis continue their refusal to talk, ``I will return to the Palestine National Council and tell them it's no use, these people do not want peace.'' Israel considers the PLO a terrorist organization and refuses to negotiate with it. Egyptian politicians and labor leaders from Jordan, Iraq and Sudan spoke before Arafat, surrounded by 10 bodyguards, addressed the rally. His remarks were received with cheers, applause and occasional chants accompanied by a lute and drums. A group of young men and women sang: ``We are all Arafat; long live Arafat, president of Palestine. Egypt's workers greet the martyrs of the intefadeh.'' In Madrid, the Spanish Foreign Ministry said Arafat would arrive Jan. 27 to meet with the foreign ministers of Spain, France and Greece. Spain assumed the rotating presidency of the European Economic Community on Monday. The Common Market designated it and the other two nations Dec. 19 to consult all parties involved about arranging an international peace conference on the Middle East. Arafat has visited several European countries since the U.N. session in Geneva seeking support for the Palestinian independence declaration and his peace initiative. 
Here is the official English-language text of a Libyan Mission statement issued Wednesday on the U.S. downing of two Libyan jets: Communique issued by the People's Committee of the People's Bureau for Foreign Liason. This morning, the United States of America launched a new and premeditated attack against the great Jamahiriya. American airplanes intercepted and downed two Libyan reconnaissance airplanes which were on a routine mission over international waters. This premeditated American aggression was preceded by reinforcing the 6th Fleet in the Mediterranean Sea with the movement of huge naval military concenration comprising 13 naval vessels, the nuclear airplane carrier Roosevelt, as well as a landing force consisting of 12,000 personnel. It was also declared that those naval forces were sent to conduct maneuvers opposite Libyan shores. This naval military concentration was coupled with American threats to attack Libya and destroy specific targets therein under pretexts and justifications that have been rejected and condemned by world public opinion. This massive American military concentration in the Mediterranean Sea is only a smoke screen. It cannot cloud the fact that should be clear to the world, i.e. launching a wide-scale attack against the Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya that targets its military and economic installations. The pretext of conducting routine maneuvers reinforces rather than weakens the American administration's decision to launch this attack. This is underlined by the declarations and statements made by officials in the American administration which do not conceal their inclination to attack the Jamahiriya under any circumstances and any pretexts. In protesting against repeated attacks made against it by the American administration, the Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya calls upon the international community, its international and regional organizations and bodies to shoulder heir responsibilities and hasten to: _Stop the maneuvers conducted by American opposite Libyan shores and call for the withdrawal of the American naval military concentration which exists for aggressive purposes and not for conducting normal maneuvers as America claims. _Shoulder the responsibility of the inernational community in halting this aggression against pacifist and peaceful people. This aggression threatens peace in the Mediterranean region as well as world peace and security. In facing an unjust aggression made against it by a world superpower, the Libyan Arab people reserves its legitimate right to defend itself and its existence. 
Leaflets calling for an armed uprising by ethnic Albanians in Yugoslavia's troubled southern province of Kosovo have been discovered in a town in the region, the state Tanjug news agency reported Wednesday. ``Pamphlets with hostile contents calling on the Albanian national minority to start an armed insurrection to fulfill separatist goals'' were found during the New Year weekend in the town of Istok, about 150 miles south of Belgrade, the Yugoslav capital. The leaflets also urged the Slav population of the province to emigrate from Kosovo as soon as possible, Tanjug said. The region, Yugoslavia's poorest, has been the scene of strife between the ethnic Albanian majority and the Slav minority since some Albanians rioted there in 1981, demanding greater autonomy for the province. Serbs and Montenegrins, the Slavs who make up about 15 percent of Kosovo's population, say ethnic Albanians have been harassing and persecuting them to force them to leave the province. They have demanded tougher government action to prevent an alleged disruption of law and order. Kosovo is an autonomous province of the Yugoslav republic of Serbia. Proposed amendments to the constitution, now under consideration, would lessen autonomy and bring Kosovo under greater central control by Serbia. 
A federal judge on Wednesday upheld the government's right to prosecute Panama's military ruler General Manuel Antonio Noriega on charges he turned his Central American nation into a way station for cocaine traffickers. U.S. District Judge William Hoeveler rejected arguments by Noriega's defense attorneys that as Panama's de facto head of state Noriega was immune from prosecution. ``We have this material, this poison, being sent to us,'' the judge said in a ruling from the bench after the two-hour hearing. ``To countenance sovereign immunity under these particular circumstances would be a serious error.'' Hoeveler noted the U.S. State Department's affidavit that Noriega is not accepted as legal ruler of Panama. ``Our government has said he is not, and in fact has characterized him as kind of an outlaw head of state,'' he said. The judge refused to rule on two other issues raised by Noriega's defense attorney Neal Sonnett. The defense had argued Noriega was being selectively prosecuted to force him into concessions on control of the Panama Canal, which under treaty is to be turned over to the Panamanian government at the end of the century. Sonnett also said in his motion for dismissal that pretrial publicity would make it impossible to find an objective jury. The judge said those issues would have to wait until the case was ready to go to trial, which both sides interpreted to mean when Noriega was extradited to the United States. U.S. Attorney Dexter Lehtinen, conceded Noriega would be difficult to extradite, but said his regime could fall anytime. ``He's on tenuous ground,'' Lehtinen said. ``He's just a second-rate military commander, an upstart who seized power in Panama.'' About 30 Panamanian exiles in the courtroom audience crowded around prosecutors and later, outside the courthouse, cheered the announcement of Hoeveler's ruling. The indictment accuses Noriega and 15 others of working with Colombia's Medellin cartel to smuggle cocaine into the United States, alleging that the general provided protection and services to the traffickers. Following the February indictment, the United States declared an economic blockade of Panama and worked openly with Noriega's domestic opposition to depose him, but the effort failed. At one point, over the objections of Miami prosecutors, the United States offered to drop the indictment if Noriega would resign. The 12-count indictment returned by a federal grand jury in Miami accused Noriega of accepting $4.6 million in bribes from the drug cartel. A grand jury in Tampa indicted Noriega on three marijuana importation counts the next day. Chief Deputy Assistant U.S. Attorney Richard Gregorie initially sought to have the defense motion sealed for fear it might contain ``blackmail'' against the Reagan administration but agreed to release the documents publicly when he found there was none. Noriega has claimed to have information in his files on President-elect George Bush. Sonnett said one foreign policy issue was pressure by conservatives in the Reagan administration to renegotiate the Panama Canal Treaty signed during the Carter administration. The treaty hands control of the waterway over to Panama at the end of the century. ``There were attempts to modify aspects of the treaty,'' he said. ``We argue that it was one of the circumstances leading up to a decision to attempt to get Noriega out of power.'' The motion contains quotes from the news media made by Reagan administration officials, such as Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams, that the defense says demonstrate the political nature of the case. Abrams is quoted as saying in May that ``the indictment drove Noriega crazy and gave us a terrific bargaining tool.'' The defense, calling the case against Noriega ``indictment diplomacy,'' noted that in March the government offered to guarantee it would not seek his extradition if he fled to Spain, and in May offered to drop the indictments altogether if he left Panama. 
The dollar opened at 125.00 yen on the Tokyo foreign exchange market Thursday, up from Wednesday's close of 124.05 yen. 
Libya claimed the destruction of two Libyan jet fighters by U.S. Navy planes on Wednesday was a premeditated attack, and Col. Moammar Gadhafi declared his nation would ``meet challenge with challenge.'' ``If America has prevailed because it is a superpower in the air and the sea, it will inevitably be defeated on land,'' Gadhafi said. ``We, as well as the fish, are awaiting them.'' Gadhafi asked the Soviet Union to move some of its warships in the Mediterranean to the area in which U.S. vessels are operating near Libya, the official Yugoslav news agency Tanjug reported from Tripoli, the Libyan capital. Tanjug reported later that Tripoli residents jammed filling stations in a flight from the city a few hours after the aerial encounter. Tanjug's correspondent, one of the few non-Arab journalists with an office in Tripoli, has had excellent access to high Libyan sources in the past and his reports often prove reliable. A reporter for Italian TV said Gadhafi's residence-headquarters in Tripoli, already equipped with watchtowers and tanks parked in camouflaged garages, had been even more heavily fortified. The Italian correspondent, who arrived in Tripoli on Wednesday, said anti-missile batteries had been placed in key areas. He said the government television station was one point at which security was notably greater. He described the reaction as ``first incredulity, then anger'' when word arrived in Tripoli that fighters from the U.S. 6th Fleet had shot down two Libyan MiG jets. Gadhafi's compound was a target of the last U.S. military strike against Libya: bombing raids in April 1986 on Tripoli and Benghazi. President Reagan described the raids as retaliation for the bombing of a Berlin disco frequented by American servicemen, which the United States blamed on terrorists sponsored by Libya. Wednesday evening, the Libyan Foreign Ministry summoned heads of Western European diplomatic missions and asked them to condemn the U.S. ``aggression'' and to prevent any escalation in tensions, the official Libyan news agency JANA reported. Gadhafi, according to JANA, branded the U.S. action on Wednesday as an example of increased ``official American terrorism, which is backed by brute force.'' In spite of it and ``of the threats, the revolutionaries of great Libya will not bow their heads and will not abandon their principles and the objectives of their eternal motherland of unity, liberation and the building of progress,'' he declared. ``They will meet challenge with challenge,'' he said. In New York, Libyan Ambassador Ali Sunni Muntasser requested an emergency meeting of the U.N. Security Council to condemn ``this premeditated act of aggression'' in shooting down two aircraft that were ``unarmed, on reconnaissance, ordinary, routine flying.'' Earlier in the day, Libya's ambassador to Rome linked the event to U.S. charges that Libya had built a chemical weapons factory in the desert southwest of Tripoli. In Washington, the State Department said there was ``absolutely no connection.'' Gadhafi has said the plant's function is to produce medicines. JANA reported in recent days that Libyan doctors and nurses were conducting a sit-in at the factory, anticipating a U.S. attack. The agency quoted the Foreign Ministry as describing U.S. naval presence in the Mediterranean as ``a smokescreen'' for a ``large-scale aggression to be launched'' against Libyan military and economic installations. Libya ``preserves its legitimate right to defend itself and its existence,'' JANA quoted the ministry as saying. It said the ministry had asked for an emergency meeting of foreign ministers from Arab League nations. Libyan state radio carried this Foreign Ministry statement earlier Wednesday: ``At 1103 hours (5:03 a.m. EST) while two Libyan reconnaissance aircraft were carrying out a patrol over international waters U.S. aircraft carried out a premeditated attack on them and shot them down.'' Abdel Rahman Shalgam, the Libyan ambassador to Italy, said the U.S. Navy action was ``dangerous,'' but did not say how Libya would respond. His embassy issued a statement Wednesday evening calling it ``an act of destabilizing provocation for all the Mediterranean area.'' ``It is an incomprehensible provocation,'' the statement said, and Libya ``asks for the solidarity of the Mediterranean area peoples, recognizing (especially) the role played by Italy in international peacemaking.'' Giulio Andreotti, Italy's foreign minister, has recommended that allegations about the chemical factory be discussed at an international conference on chemical weapons beginning Saturday in Paris. 
Israeli soldiers killed a 16-year-old boy Wednesday and wounded five other Palestinians, hospital officials reported, and left-wing legislators said they would defy Israeli law and meet with PLO officials. A Palestinian man was shot dead in Jericho in the occupied West Bank, but it was not clear whether the killing was connected with the 13-month-old uprising in the occupied territories. Conferences are planned in Paris and the Hague later this month despite Israeli laws that prohibit meetings with the Palestine Liberation Organization. A Palestinian newspaper and Israeli magazine announced plans Wednesday for a similar meeting in New York in March, to which members of Israel's parliament and the Palestine National Council, the PLO legislature, would be invited. In the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, soldiers opened fire during at least four clashes with stone-throwing youths, according to Arab reports and hospital officials. Nasser Ismail Nasser, 16, was killed In Gaza's Deir el Balah refugee camp, officials at Ahli Arab hospital in Gaza City said. The army confirmed Nasser's death, which brought to 346 the number of Palestinians killed in the rebellion. Fourteen Israelis also have died. In Jericho, 25-year-old Bassam Barahme was killed by unidentified gunmen near his home Wednesday night, army officials and Israel radio reported. Barahme was taken to Mukassad Hospital in Arab east Jerusalem and died of two bullet wounds, the radio said. The reason for the attack was not known. A military official said: ``Troops were not involved. It was a clash between residents.'' The uprising has been credited with bringing about a more moderate stance by PLO chairman Yasser Arafat that has, in turn, encouraged some Israelis to press for a talks with the PLO. Arafat said Wednesday his peace overtures to Israel would be withdrawn unless it agreed to negotiate. ``I don't expect Israel to accept peace easily or to give in easily,'' he said during a rally in Cairo after a meeting with President Hosni Mubarak of Egype. But if Israel continues to spurn talks, ``I will return to the Palestine National Council and tell them: it's no use, these people (Israelis) do not want peace.'' In Jerusalem, Lova Eliav of Israel's mainstream Labor Party said Wednesday that he and five other Israeli politicians would attend the meetings with PLO officials. ``I think the Israeli government must negotiate with the PLO and the meetings in The Hague and Paris can be a catalyst for future meetings,'' he said. Organizers of the Hague meeting said they believed the PLO would be represented by two top officials, Bassam Abu Sharif and Khaled Al Hassan. Eliav said he and and fellow Labor Party member Ora Namir would go to Paris, along with Yair Tsaban of the socialist Mapam Party and Shulamit Aloni of the left-wing Citizens Rights Movement. All are members of Israel's parliament. He said Abba Eban, a former Labor foreign minister, and Haim Tzadok, a former Supreme Court justice, would attend the Hague meeting. The Hebrew-language Hadashot newspaper also reported an unidentified Labor legislator was trying to arrange a meeting with Arafat in Paris. Meanwhile, Palestinian editor Hanna Seniora said his PLO-backed newspaper Al Fajr and the Israeli magazine New Outlook would sponsor a meeting March 18-20 in New York to bring Palestinians and Israelis together. After Arafat said Dec. 14 in Geneva that the PLO recognized Israel's right to exist and renounced terrorism, the United States opened meetings with the PLO. But Israeli officials continue to denounce Arafat's organization as a terrorist group. A Foreign Ministry spokesman said Wednesday that the ministry asked Israeli legislators not to attend the meetings. A group of 31 right-wing and religious party lawmakers also asked government officials to legally block those going to Paris from leaving Israel. An army official said the military was investigating the death of an 11-year-old Palestinian who, family members charge, suffered a fatal head injury when he was pushed off a military jeep on Dec. 10. The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said there was no evidence that the boy, Badr Karadeh of Nablus, was ever in military custody. But a Palestinian physician, Dr. Abdel Hadi Abu Zant of Nablus, said he saw the boy seized, beaten and taken away by Israeli soldiers in a jeep. Two left-wing members of parliament _ Dedi Zucker and Yossi Sarid of the Citizens Rights Movement _ have called for a Defense Ministry probe. In another development, Mayor Elias Freij of the West Bank town of Bethlehem, who proposed a truce in the uprising, appeared to be in hiding Wednesday after a warning from Arafat and death threats painted on the town walls. Freij had proposed conditions under which Israel would free 5,000 Palestinian prisoners, allow universities to open, and hold municipal elections for the first time in 12 years. Arafat, in remarks broadcast Monday, said, ``No one can stop the intefadeh, and any responsible Palestinian calling for stopping it exposes himself to the bullets of our people.'' 
People in the Northeast bundled up and those in the Southwest covered up Wednesday, but residents of the southern Plains basked in springlike weather as temperatures reached into the 50s from northern Texas to Nebraska. In the Southwest, rain fell from southern California into western New Mexico, with snow piling up in the Arizona mountains. Flagstaff received 5 inches of new snow for a total of 10 inches on the ground. There was heavy rain and scattered thunderstorms elsewhere in Arizona, with over a half inch of rain recorded Wednesday morning at Kingman and Yuma. Southern California's deserts and valley also got a soaking, with more than three-quarters of an inch of rain reported at Blythe and Needles. Freezing rain iced roads around Cedar City, in southwest Utah, making travel hazardous. Snow was heavy at times over parts of southern Utah, where 2 to 4 inches were expected. The eastern Great Lakes and Appalachian region got its own share of snow, with up to 8 inches reported in the southeastern Cleveland suburbs of Bedford and Garfield Heights and 4 to 8 inches elsewhere in the area. Snow also piled up in West Virginia. Up to 7 inches fell across much of the state, with up to a foot reported in parts of the northern mountains. Snowfall across the mountains of Pennsylvania ranged from 5 to 7 inches. Temperatures across northern and central New England were between 10 above and 10 below zero at midday and northwest winds ranged from 10 to 30 mph, putting wind chill temperatures between 30 below and 50 degrees below zero. It was much better elsewhere in the Northeast. At Newark International Airport in New Jersey, meteorologist Walter Zamorski of the National Weather Service said the high for the day was 29 degrees at 1 a.m. ``It got colder as the sun came up,'' he said, chuckling. ``It dropped into the teens by the afternoon, and with the wind chill, it probably brings it close to minus 40 below.'' In New York, the wind chill factor prompted the National Weather Service to issue frostbite warnings for people venturing outdoors without bundling up. In Syracuse, officials closed schools due to the cold. By contrast, the southern half of the Plains enjoyed temperatures into the 50s. To the north, after many days of sub-zero readings, Devils Lake, N.D., hit 36 degrees Wednesday afternoon, tying the 1984 record high for the date. The low in the nation early Wednesday was 23 degrees below zero at Pellston, Mich. Temperatures around the nation at 2 p.m. EST ranged from 11 degrees below zero at Saranac Lake, N.Y., to 85 degrees at Harlingen, Texas. For Thursday, the National Weather Service predicted widespread rain throughout the middle Mississippi, lower Missouri and western Ohio valleys. Numerous showers and thunderstorms were forecast from southeast Kansas and central Oklahoma into Arkansas and the lower Mississippi Valley. In the upper Midwest, freezing rain was expected from southeastern Minnesota and central Wisconsin into southeast lower Michigan and northeastern Ohio, with scattered snow from northeastern Minnesota into central lower Michigan. In the West, numerous showers were forecast along the northern Pacific coast with scattered rainfall farther south. Snowshowers will be scattered from the northern Rockies into Nevada, with more frequent snow from northern Montana into central Idaho. High temperatures again will be in the single digits and teens across northern and central New England, and in the 20s from the northern Rockies through northern North Dakota and the northern Great Lakes into southern New England. From the California coast across the southern Plains into the Tennessee Valley and the south Atlantic coast, highs were forecast in the 50s and 60s, but rising into the 70s across the western and central Gulf coast. The nation's southernmost reaches, south Florida and the tip of Texas, will have temperatures in the 80s. Highs will be in the 30s or 40s across the remainder of the nation. 
Two caches of the Czechoslovak-made plastic explosive Semtex belonging to the outlawed Irish Republic Army were found on both sides of the Irish border on Wednesday, police said. A cache in the center of Londonderry, Northern Ireland, contained an unstated amount of Semtex, bomb-making equipment and ammunition, police said. They said it was in a house in a densely populated area overlooking Craigavon Bridge. Police in the Irish Republic said they found 21 pounds of Semtex, along with 36 homemade mortars loaded with Semtex and ready for firing, electrical bomb detonators, assault rifles and ammunition, in a shed on an isolated farm near Birr, County Offaly, 70 miles southwest of Dublin. Police in both cases said the caches belonged to the IRA, which is fighting British rule in Northern Ireland. They say the IRA is believed to get its Semtex from Libya. The explosive looks like powder and comes in bags marked with its name. Investigators say it may have been used by whoever planted a bomb aboard Pan Am Flight 103, a jumbo jet that exploded over Scotland on Dec. 21, killing 270 people. 
Mayor Art Agnos on Wednesday defended as ``low-keyed and responsible,'' a sweep of up to 50 homeless people from a campsite of tarpaulins and plastic sheets near City Hall. The evictions Tuesday followed complaints the homeless camp was blocking access to a building. About a dozen police officers watched as public works employees removed the shelters. A garbage truck used in the eviction was emblazoned with the slogan ``The Sweep Is On.'' ``The campers moved voluntarily when requested to do so and were given ample time to collect their belongings,'' said Agnos. ``The homeless problem was created by federal policies that reduced the amount of local housing aid by 80 percent over then past eight years. No city can make up for that.'' Agnos has refused to open a National Guard armory to the homeless, saying it is too small and would be too expensive to run. But four days before the sweep, he asked local religious leaders to make churches and synagogues available. The encampment in U.N. Plaza, in view of City Hall, was set up a few days earlier. Dozens of men and women spent the holidays in the encampment, using sleeping bags, plastic sheets, tarps and blankets to ward off the rain and cold as a series of storms struck Northern California. Pacific Gas and Electric complained to police that the shelters were blocking a fire exit, company officials said. ``Right now, we probably look like the bad guys,'' said PG&amp;E spokeswoman Cynthia Schramm. ``But we have a lot of sympathy for these people. We only wanted the police to unblock'' a fire door. Police Sgt. Dave Ambrose said the operation was ``not a police action. The San Francisco police stood by while the Department of Public Works took apart the temporary structures.'' Earl Thompson, who helped start the tent community, refused to leave and was arrested. Others who built their tent shacks on the plaza wandered away, but vowed to move back. James Robinson, 32, said he didn't know where he would head next. ``It depends on how far they beat us back,'' he said. On Tuesday, Katherine Baker, an organizer of the tent city, stood a few yards away as DPW crews hosed down the bricks where the homeless had been. She stood near a pile of blankets and shopping carts that had once been the ``community house. '' She said they had banded together for self-protection against theft or worse. ``If we're scattered ... we've got the robbers and night creepers wanting to come by and mess you up,'' she said. ``We got nowhere else to go ... the hotels aren't safe, the shelters are packed.'' ``They treat us like tramps,'' said Baker. ``And it's hard _ every damn day. How long can one human being keep taking that from another human being?'' The city houses about half of San Francisco's estimated 6,000 homeless in budget hotels. Bob Prentice, coordinator of the mayor's homeless program, said the city has been trying to find another building that can be used as a temporary shelter. ``We're doing the best we can to get a place for them,'' he said. ``Until then, they have to keep a low profile.'' 
A United Nations refugee expert visiting the southern tip of Texas said Wednesday she has seen hundreds of Central American emigrants camping in makeshift tents and crowded into dilapidated motels. ``Clearly these people are experiencing difficulty and hardship, and this is one thing I wanted to come down and see about,'' said Susan Timberlake of the Washington, D.C., office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees. Ms. Timberlake arrived in the lower Rio Grande Valley on Tuesday night and planned to stay until Thursday visiting immigrant shelters and meeting with local officials and Immigration and Naturalization Service representatives. Ms. Timberlake said as of Wednesday she had not observed any apparent violations of international law. Al De Leon, assistant INS district director for examinations in Harlingen, said no violations of U.N. protocol were relayed to him in his meeting with Ms. Timberlake. ``Basically, she is down here to observe and learn about the situation,'' he said. More than 30,000 Central Americans have crossed the Rio Grande illegally near Brownsville and sought political asylum since the end of May when the INS started keeping count of the growing flood of ``other than Mexican'' newcomers. The concentration of Central Americans in the valley has increased sharply since Dec. 16 when the INS started requiring asylum-seeking immigrants in the area to submit their applications at the INS' Harlingen office and to receive word of approval or denial here. The U.N. refugee office's interest in Cameron County, the state's southernmost, was not a result of the new INS procedure, ``but by the fact that there are large numbers of asylum-seekers here, and that's what the UN is interested in,'' said Ms. Timberlake. The office of the High Commissioner for Refugees, based in Geneva, was established to protect refugees' rights. More than 100 countries have subscribed to a 1951 convention and-or a 1967 protocol relating to the status of refugees. Each defines who is a refugee and outlines proper conditions for handling refugees. Much of the U.N. language was incorporated into U.S. law with the 1980 Refugee Act. Refugees are defined in part as people who are outside their country because of well-founded fear of persecution. ``When I go back, I'll discuss what I've seen with my office and with my headquarters in Geneva, and we'll sit down with the (U.S) government and discuss it,'' Ms. Timberlake said. A main concern of the U.N. body is whether refugees have adequate access to the asylum process, she said. Asylum-seekers previously were allowed to travel to their destination cities, usually Miami or Los Angeles. A huge backlog of asylum cases in those cities and a large number of unwarranted asylum claims prompted the INS to adopt the new procedure, officials said. INS officials have said most of the applicants are seeking economic betterment, not fleeing persecution, and therefore do not qualify for asylum. Those denied asylum will be asked to leave the country or face deportation, but may appeal their cases. Because there is at least a 30-day wait for an answer from the INS, many of the immigrants with no money and no place to go have begun camping out in the brush under discarded sheets of plastic. A shanty town of plastic roofs continues to grow outside the Catholic Church-sponsored Casa Oscar Romero shelter for Central Americans southeast of Brownsville. Casa Romero is limited to a capacity of 200 by court order. Ms. Timberlake said she had visited that camp site, dotted with human feces, where 250 people stayed Tuesday night, and the Amber Motel, a condemned structure in Brownsville that remains packed with Central Americans. 
At age 11, Scott James had been in and out of special schools. His mother deemed him uncontrollable and tried for two months to have him placed in state custody, but state officials refused. Protective custody, the state said, is for children who are abused or abandoned, not those with behavior problems that require treatment. Today, Scott is in state custody _ accused of murder. Scott is confined at the Maine Youth Center in South Portland, accused of setting a New Year's Eve fire at a six-unit apartment building in Biddeford that killed a 53-year-old man. Authorities have not decided whether the boy will be tried as a juvenile or an adult. Officials who deal with emotionally troubled youngsters say Scott is one of many children who need help but cannot get it because there are not enough resources to go around. Roger Raymond, Biddeford's special education director, said he contacted the state Department of Human Services two months ago because he feared Scott was at risk. ``It's terrible what happened,'' Raymond said. ``It goes without saying, we don't have the resources available for kids who are in need of such services. And I doubt that his situation is unique.'' After a three-hour detention hearing Tuesday, District Court Judge Robert Crowley found probable cause for a felony murder charge stemming from the fire death of Raymond R. Lauzon. Assistant Attorney General Eric Wright said the boy must appear Jan. 17 in District Court. Felony murder is a homicide that occurs during the commission of a felony, in this case arson, in which someone's death is a reasonably foreseeable result. Should Scott be tried as a juvenile and convicted, he could remain in the custody of the state until he is 21 or 22 years old. If tried for murder as an adult, he would face a minimum of 25 years in prison and a maximum life term. At Tuesday's hearing, Scott's 8-year-old brother, Jason, told the court that the two boys had been visiting Lauzon and were told to leave when the older boy was caught trying to steal money from Lauzon's bedroom. Jason said he walked away but Scott lingered around the apartment building before joining him later. In interviews and court testimony, juvenile caseworkers, school officials and Scott's mother, Janet Sullivan, portrayed him as an emotionally troubled youngster who had been placed in three special schools but remained uncontrollable. For the past three months he had run away about once a week from Ms. Sullivan, 31, who is divorced, jobless and on welfare, according to testimony. A spokesman at the Department of Human Services said Scott's problems were not so severe that he needed to be placed in a foster home or residential treatment center. Peter Walsh, director of the Bureau of Social Services, said the department ``never found this child to be in jeopardy and needing his relationship with his parent severed.'' 
Slashing the number of U.N. peacekeeping troops in Namibia will give South Africa an opportunity to maintain control over the territory, a rebel leader warned on Wednesday. Rebel leader Sam Nujoma ripped a move by U.N. Security Council members to reduce from 7,500 to 3,000 the contingent that will oversee Namibia's transition this year to independence from South Africa. ``This obviously is unacceptable, unjust and undemocratic,'' Nujoma told a news conference. ``It is an attempt to assist South Africa to achieve politically what it failed to achieve militarily.'' He said a U.N. force of 3,000 ``won't be able to control anything,'' given the scope of Namibia's 800,000-square-mile territory. Instead of reducing the transition force, Nujoma said, the United Nations should increase it to ensure that the transition to independence and black majority rule is carried out peacefully and without South African interference. The proposal for a reduction in the 7,500-member force was based on financial considerations. Nujoma, who leads the rebel South-West Africa People's Organization, said the United States was one of those who supported the reduction plan. He did not name the other nations that supported it. Two weeks ago, South Africa agreed to implement a U.N. plan for Namibia's transition to independence. As part of the deal, Cuba agreed to withdraw its 50,000 troops from Namibia's northern neighbor, Angola. South Africa will be allowed to keep a residual force of 1,500 troops in Namibia until an independent government takes power, but Nujoma expressed concern about alleged South African efforts to continue influencing events in the territory. Among other things, he said anti-independence death squads operate in Namibia. Nujoma was in Cuba for talks with President Fidel Castro and to take part in activities related to the 30th anniversary of the Cuban revolution. Namibia also is known as South-West Africa. 
King Hassan II and representatives of Marxist guerrillas fighting Morocco for control of the Western Sahara met Wednesday for the first time since their war began more than 13 years ago. The Moroccan government said Hassan's talks with the delegation from the Polisario Front touched on a proposed referendum for self-determination in the former Spanish colony, a phosphate-rich territory Morocco annexed in 1975. Both Morocco and Polisario, which has bases in Algeria, have agreed in principle to a U.N.-supervised referendum on the future of the Western Sahara. No date has been set. Polisario has demanded that before a referendum, Morocco must withdraw its troops and administrators. It has called for direct negotiations, conditions refused by Morocco. A statement from the Information Ministry said the Moroccan king received the delegation at a palace in Marrakech. Included in the Polisario delegation were Bechir Mustapha Sayed, in charge of external relations, Brahim Ghali, responsible for defense, and Mahfoud Ali Beiba, designated prime minister of the Saharian Arab Democratic Republic, proclaimed by the Polisario in 1976. The Polisario Front has said it decided to send the delegation to Morocco after the Moroccan monarch told the French press last month that he was ready to meet Polisario officials.  Polisario declared the Saharawi Arab Democratic Republic in February 1976. It has since been recognized by 45 countries, 27 of them Organization of African Unity members. Relations between Morocco and Algeria, the guerrillas' main backer, improved last year. Five Americans were killed last month when Polisario guerrillas shot down a plane and disabled another that were spraying a remote desert area for locusts. The guerrillas have apologized for the Dec. 10 incident, saying they mistook the plane for a Moroccan military reconnaissance aircraft. 
Dolphins saved the life of a 17-year-old boy who was attacked by a large shark while surfing off the north coast of New South Wales state, police said. The shark tore a huge chunk from the boy's surfboard. Police said a group of dolphins chased off the shark that attacked Adam McGuire on Tuesday at Evans Head, about 400 miles north of Sydney. McGuire, from Newcastle, about 100 miles north of Sydney, suffered a badly cut abdomen in the attack, police and ambulance officers said. He swam to shore despite his injuries and raised the alarm. Ambulance officers attended McGuire and rushed him to a hospital, where he underwent surgery and was in stable condition. Police said McGuire was surfing about 300 feet or more off Half Tide Beach with two friends when a shark, believed to be a tiger shark, attacked him twice. On the first pass, the shark gouged out a big piece of his surfboard and knocked him into the water. Sydney shark expert John Hajje said McGuire probably could thank his surfboard as much as the dolphins for his survival. ``The police told me that when the shark attacked it took a chunk out of the board and he fell off,'' he said. ``Rather than attack him it kept on going for the board. It really just brushed him and didn't take much of a bite.'' Hajje said it was not the first time he heard of dolphins intervening in a shark attack, although he had yet to confirm the details of this incident. ``Dolphins are highly intelligent creatures and it certainly wouldn't be beyond them to know when a human's in distress and help out,'' he said. 
A man who spotted his stolen truck on a traffic-clogged freeway ran after its driver with an unloaded rifle and got the truck back, authorities said. The truck's driver was arrested. About two dozen people, some using car phones, called the California Highway Patrol for fear that Interstate 80 was about to become a combat zone after they spotted Michael Wright, 45, stalking the other man on foot. Wright, driving his car, recognized his stolen truck about noon Tuesday on the freeway in Pinole, about 10 miles north of Berkeley. Apparently undetected, Wright followed the truck south eight miles until traffic stopped. Wright, who had a .22-caliber rifle with him, pulled his car onto the shoulder of the freeway, got out and rifle in hand, approached the truck, said Highway Patrol Officer Ted Wong. The driver of the truck saw Wright coming toward him, got out of the truck and started running the other way, Wong said. Wright tried to chase the man but lost him in traffic and returned to his truck. But by this time, motorists' calls brought the Highway Patrol and Berkeley police to the scene, and one patrol officer drove to the freeway exit where the suspect was getting off the highway. Eric Staudinger, 22, of San Pablo, was arrested for investigation of auto theft and possession of stolen property, authorities said. Wright and a friend drove his two vehicles to his home in Vallejo. 
Former U.S. Ambassador to Austria Ronald Lauder, heir to the Estee Lauder cosmetics fortune, said Wednesday that he'll run for mayor of New York, becoming the first announced challenger to incumbent Edward Koch. ``I have been a diplomat and a businessman but above all I'm a New Yorker and I'm particularly concerned about the future of our city, a city in crisis,'' the 44-year-old Republican said. Koch, a Democrat, has said he intends to run for a fourth term as mayor of the heavily Democratic city. Lauder is on the Forbes magazine list of the 400 richest Americans with a fortune estimated at $333 million. ``If I ran my business the way New York City is run, I'd be bankrupt,'' said Lauder, who refused to say how much of his own money he'd be willing to spend in a campaign to unseat Koch. Lauder made his announcement 140 miles north of New York City as Republican and Conservative party leaders attended the opening of the Legislature's annual session in Albany. A former treasurer of the state Republican Committee, Lauder has toyed with running for statewide office in the past but has not done so. He was considered a potential challenger to U.S. Sen. Daniel Moynihan last year but declined. ``The major issue is we've reached a point where it's time for a change,'' Lauder said of Koch's tenure. Sensing political vulnerability in Koch, several Democrats have talked of running against him this year, but none have declared their candidacy. The potential rivals include Manhattan Borough President David Dinkins, City Council President Andrew Stein, former Metropolitan Transportation Authority Chairman Richard Ravitch, city Comptroller Harrison Goldin and Charles Hynes, a special state prosecutor who handled the Howard Beach racial assault case. U.S. Attorney Rudolph Giuliani, a Republican, also has been mentioned as a potential candidate. Lauder said he'd be willing to take on Giuliani in a primary. There's been talk in Republican circles that U.S. Sen. Alfonse D'Amato might be advancing Lauder's candidacy in an attempt to head off any mayoral move by Giuliani. Lauder said he's spoken to D'Amato and the senator is ``in good support of my candidacy.'' D'Amato, who has had cool relations with Giuliani for more than a year, was in Albany for the opening of the legislative session but did not attend Lauder's news conference. 
A gunman who held 20 people hostage at a restaurant before being shot to death by police told a waitress to fetch his boots because ``a good cowboy dies with his boots on,'' the woman said. As Wayne Strozzi, 35, hung on, mortally wounded, he shot to death another waitress. Another hostage was slain by police as he escaped through a bathroom window and fled the Riverhouse Restaurant during Tuesday's melee. Two police officers also were wounded by Strozzi during the incident, which began when the paroled drug offender, apparently angry that his estranged wife had begun dating another man, assaulted her at her home. He fled first to his own home, and then to the restaurant, where he held off police for more than an hour. District Attorney Stu VanMeveren said at a news conference that the focus of his investigation would be on the ``justification or non-justification of the shootings.'' VanMeveren described Strozzi as a veteran of the Vietnam War who was suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder. Barbara Strozzi also described her husband as troubled by his Vietnam experiences. She suggested that his wounding the officers was a way of provoking police to kill him. ``I know that if he had wanted to, he would have killed them,'' she said. ``He had all kinds of (marksmanship) medals. When he shot the officers, I think he wanted to commit suicide but didn't have the courage.'' During the standoff, Strozzi threatened he was ``going to waste everybody'' and intended to burn down the restaurant, demanded a getaway car and, finally, asked for his boots, a fresh shirt and a plane to Libya. Following hour-long negotiations by megaphone, a sniper from a Special Weapons and Tactics team opened fire as Strozzi stood with a hostage near the front door, hitting Strozzi at least three times in the head and abdomen. Strozzi then shot waitress Sally Mills in the chest and thighs, police said. Strozzi and Mills died at McKee Medical Center. Mills, a single mother in her 40s, had been working at the restaurant only a few weeks, employees said. Fenton Crookshank, 45, who was attending a Lion's Club meeting in the basement of the restaurant, was slain by a police officer as he dived through a bathroom window and tried to flee. Authorities said Crookshank, a former Nebraska school principal who managed a lumber company, refused to respond to their orders to halt as he ran toward them from the restaurant. Strozzi was paroled from the Colorado State Penitentiary in October 1987 after serving 13 months on a conviction for cocaine distribution. ``I couldn't tell if he was drunk, but he was on some kind of drug, I know that,'' said Steve Bethel, 32, a reserve police officer who was one of the hostages. Bethel said he and his wife, Belva, 30, and their three young children had just finished dinner and were preparing to pay their bill when the gunman came in. Bethel, who does not carry a gun off-duty, said Strozzi grabbed his wife and stuck a 9mm handgun behind her ear. ``He told us, `Everybody down on the floor.' I thought he was just going to rob the place,'' Bethel said. ``It happened so quick, you didn't have time to think.'' Dan Scheibe, a member of the Centennial Bass Fishermen's Club which was meeting in the basement of the restaurant along with two other groups, said he heard a man cursing and people screaming, at which point he and nearly 40 other club members escaped through a rear basement door. ``He said he was going to waste everybody,'' said Jim Carr, another Centennial club member. Strozzi, seeking a getaway, ordered Bethel to drive his car to the front entrance of the restaurant and put his three children in it. After Bethel parked the car, Strozzi walked outside with Mrs. Bethel when he spotted police Officer Joe Berdin in the parking lot and shot him in the shoulder. Strozzi then pulled the woman back into the restaurant and began issuing demands. Waitress Ann Knight said Strozzi ordered her to give him money from the cash register. Knight said he also ordered her to fetch his boots and a shirt from his pickup truck. ``A good cowboy dies with his boots on,'' she said he told her. When Strozzi told her to return a second time to his pickup because she had brought the wrong shirt, Knight escaped. Strozzi released about a half-dozen hostages, including the Bethel family and an elderly man, before the final shootout. Sheriff's Deputy Jay Hirokawa was wounded earlier when officers responding to Mrs. Strozzi's call chased Strozzi to his own home. He emerged and shot Hirokawa in the arm before fleeing to the restaurant. Hirokawa was treated and released at the hospital, and Berdin was listed in good condition. Another restaurant employee, Jennifer Matthews, 20, was treated and released for cuts after she escaped by jumping through a window. 
The Nicaraguan government sharply devalued the official currency exchange rate, raised bus fares 20,000 percent and increased fuel prices Wednesday in an effort to keep the economy afloat. The economy is so battered after eight years of war against U.S.-supported rebels that inflation last year topped 20,000 percent, according to official figures. The austerity measures were published in the Sandinista party newspaper Barricada. They include an immediate devaluation of the cordoba of more than half in relation to the U.S. dollar, a 20,000 percent increase in bus fares and a raise in fuel prices of about 120 percent. On Saturday, President Daniel Ortega said in a New Year's speech he was cutting the defense budget by 29 percent, which includes a 40 percent cut for police and other security forces. Government spending on public works projects and other essential investments are being reduced this year by 56 percent, Ortega said. The Sandinistas have maintained strict controls over business and other economic activities since they seized power from a pro-American rightist government in 1979. The government sets prices for all essential goods and services, from gasoline to bread and milk. Barricada said the Central Bank, Nicaragua's federal reserve, on Wednesday raised the official exchange parity from 920 to 2,000 cordobas to the dollar. That is the rate the government uses for essential imports such as crude oil. A parallel exchange rate, at which most transactions such as paying hotel bills are carried out, remained at 4,500 to the dollar. The black market rate is approximately 5,500 to the dollar, although it is not very large. Urban bus fares went up from half a cordoba to 100 cordobas, or one 9,000th of a U.S. cent to a little over 2 cents. The government has been heavily subsidizing bus fares to keep them low. Similarly, the price of gasoline went up from 1,900 cordobas to 4,200 cordobas a gallon, or from about 42 cents to about 95 cents a gallon. Gasoline is rationed, and motorists now get 17 gallons a month. Buses and other public means of transportation are in a shambles for lack of spare parts because of the U.S.-imposed trade embargo. The United States said Nicaragua had established close military ties with Cuba and the Soviet Union. Nicaragua gets weapons, training and other military assistance from Soviet block countries. The Reagan administration has been claiming these ties, together with alleged Sandinista aid to leftist guerrillas in El Salvador, are a threat to security in Central America. As a result, Nicaragua now mainly trades with the Soviet bloc with which it runs a big deficit. Imports last year totalled $800 million, while exports earned only $200 million. Ortega has said the trade embargo alone cost Nicaragua $315 million in income since the United States imposed it in 1985, and another $422 million in credits which the Sandinistas were refused because of U.S. pressure on world lending institutions. 
``Starlight Express,'' the lavish Andrew Lloyd Webber roller skating musical, will close Sunday unless ticket demand picks up, Bill Evans, a spokesman for the show, said Wednesday. ``It has to improve over the weekend to keep going,'' said Arthur Cantor, production adviser for the musical which opened at the Gershwin Theater in March 1987. The expensive musical breaks even at about $275,000 a week, Cantor said, and is facing several lean weeks of business following the traditional Christmas and New Year's box office surge. ``Starlight Express'' tells the story of a railroad race across the United States. The show will have played 761 performances and 22 previews if it does shut on Sunday. The musical hasn't entirely recouped its high production costs, said Cantor, but added that complete payback is ``pretty close.'' He declined to be more specific. ``Starlight Express'' will begin a 10-city, three-year national tour in late summer, said Cantor. The tour probably will start at either the Pantages Theater in Los Angeles or the Golden Gate Theater in San Francisco, he added. The original London production, which opened in March 1984, is still running. 
Investigators believe the cyanide poisoning of a teen-ager is an isolated incident, but said Wednesday they were looking into a possibility it may be linked to an unsolved tampering case of two years ago. The last known death or injury in New Jersey from product tampering was in September 1986, when a Runnemede man died after eating a small amount of soup that contained cyanide. In both cases, the tampered products were purchased at supermarkets, but the tainted goods were manufacturerd by different companies, said Camden County Prosecutor Samuel Asbell. ``Obviously, we have to look into whether or not there's a connection,'' said Asbell, adding that investigators have not found such evidence. Asbell said he knew of no motive or suspects. U.S. Food and Drug Administration inspectors, meanwhile, toured the Kraft Inc. Dairy Group plant that produced the tainted Breyers black cherry yogurt in South Edmeston, N.Y., officials said. ``We haven't seen anything that would indicate any problem there,'' said FDA spokesman William Grigg in Rockville, Md. FDA Commissioner Dr. Frank E. Young has said the incident appears to be an isolated case, Grigg said. Kraft Inc. Dairy Group, meanwhile, voluntarily added New York state Wednesday to three other states where all flavors of Breyers yogurt is being removed from retail stores. ``We are taking this step to remove any doubt in consumers' minds about the integrity of the product,'' company President Thomas Herskovits said in a news release. Thomas Lee, 17, of Haddonfield, lapsed into a coma after eating about a third of an 8-ounce container. Lee remained on a respirator at West Jersey Hospital-Voorhees late Wednesday, said spokesman Ed Kanis. Investigators also planned to look again at the carton in which the yogurt was packaged. ``We need to go back and take a closer look,'' said Matthew Lewis, an FDA district supervisor in West Orange. ``We're all trying to find out where this happened. Right now, we don't have any leads.'' Lewis said initial inspections of the carton and package lid revealed no pinholes. The company has said Breyers yogurt packages have a seal that makes any tampering evident. Asbell said there was no immediate evidence the seal had been broken. ``The number one question here is when and where the contamination occurred,'' said John H. Kundts, an FBI spokesman in Philadelphia. Breyers Yogurt products have been removed as a precaution from 167 Acme stores in southern New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Delaware, said Walter Rubel, a spokesman for the Malvern, Pa.-based chain. The yogurt containing the cyanide was purchased Sunday at a Westmont Acme supermarket, from a yogurt batch dated Feb. 9, 1989, officials said. Marilyn Riley, a spokeswoman for the New Jersey Department of Health, said state officials were cautioning consumers who called to carefully inspect any products for tampering. But Lewis said tests Tuesday on 130 similar yogurt containers turned up no sign of cyanide, which is used in rat poisoning and can be fatal to humans. Authorities said the cyanide appeared to have been on the top of the yogurt and not stirred in. The yogurt was in one of 6,900 cases, each with a dozen containers, routed through a Kraft facility in Walton, N.Y., said Mary Agnes Welsh, a spokeswoman for Kraft Inc. Dairy Group of Glenview, Ill. George Kerns, a spokesman for Asbell, said Lee's mother had purchased a batch of yogurt from the store and two other containers had been eaten without any side effects. Lee, a junior at Haddonfield Memorial High School, became ill Tuesday morning when he was eating the yogurt on his way to class. 
The pilot of an F-16a fighter jet ejected safely Wednesday before his plane crashed in a sparsely populated area north of Lake Okeechobee, authorities said. First Lt. Mark Pugh, 27, of Belpre, Ohio, ejected when his fighter went down during a training mission at the Avon Park Range near here, Sgt. Tony Rowland, public affairs officer for the base. Pugh, attached to the 308th Tactical Fighter squadron at Homestead Air Force Base, was not seriously injured and taken to MacDill Air Force Base Hospital for observation. Crews from Homestead were dispatched to the crash site after the mishap, which occurred about 10 a.m., Rowland said. He added that there was no preliminary indication of what caused the $13.9 million jet to go down. An accident board will investigate the accident, the spokesman said. 
The shooting death of a couple a few feet from their adoptive baby's crib has meant a second chance for the 18-year-old biological mother, who said Wednesday she is ready now to raise the child. Tracy Medeiros successfully fought to regain custody of Travis, the son she gave up at birth nine months ago. As she prepared him for a trip home to Massachusetts, she met Wednesday with social service workers, attended a parenting class here and talked with a child psychologist. ``Now I know I'm ready. I've grown up a lot,'' said Medeiros. ``She's a gutsy little kid. She's young and that's the big thing against her,'' said her attorney, Barbara Rohan. ``She's determined to do it. She's really determined.'' Pregnant at 17, Medeiros decided to give up the baby after her boyfriend left her. A former boyfriend introduced Medeiros to his cousin Tasia Stephens and her husband, William, of Novato. Married for 15 years and owners of successful hair salons and video stores, Tasia, 43, and William, 45, wanted desperately to adopt a baby. The young mother-to-be and the Stephenses grew close. Medeiros stayed at a home for teen-age mothers in nearby Santa Rosa during her pregnancy. She and the couple chose the baby's name together and the couple was present at his birth. The Stephenses paid her medical and travel expenses, and kept the baby even though the formal adoption process was delayed by a backlog of cases. Medeiros planned to visit the baby and the Stephenses during the yearend holidays. Then Novato police called her in Massachusetts to say the Stephenses had been found shot to death in their bed Dec. 14. Travis, hungry but unharmed, was found in his crib, where he had been unattended for at least 24 hours, authorities estimated. Suddenly, Medeiros said, the safe, secure future she arranged for her son was uncertain. ``My world was totally crushed,'' she said. ``I thought, `What am I going to do with the baby?' I thought, `I love him, I want him to be with me.''' A Marin County judge placed the baby in a foster home, and Medeiros petitioned for custody. Relatives of the Stephenses argued that returning Travis to his biological mother wasn't in his best interest. On Tuesday, Superior Court Juvenile Commissioner Sylvia Shapiro ruled the adoption wasn't final and Medeiros was still the baby's legal parent. The custody agreement requires Medeiros to take parenting classes and make monthly reports about the child's welfare so the case can be reviewed in six months. As Medeiros prepared for the trip home, the Stephenses' housekeeper and her boyfriend, Yolanda Segura and Zohelin Diaz, both 25-year-old Guatamalans, were arraigned on charges of murder. Police said they know of no motives. Rohan said experts believe Travis was old enough at the time of the slayings ``to be real affected by what happened to him,'' so meetings with a child psychologist can help Medeiros detect signs of emotional problems. Medeiros lives with her mother in Bellerica, Mass., and works at a state institution for the retarded. She has arranged full-time child care so she can continue working. ``At the time of the adoption, I was doing what I thought was best for him. Now I'm doing what's best for him again,'' Medeiros said, adding that she was so scared during the hearing that she didn't speak. ``I never really wanted to give him up in the first place,'' she said. Rohan said Medeiros at first was frightened by the new situation, by the prospect of failure and by media attention, but the lawyer said she detected a growing closeness between mother and child. ``He's a sweet, friendly little baby. He really is. He's obviously been very loved,'' Rohan said. ``I think he's starting to get to know her.'' Sebastopol attorney Allison Pharis, who handled the adoption, said Medeiros will ``be your basic hard-working, single mother trying to make it.'' The Stephenses' relatives now want an amicable relationship with her, she said. 
The losing side in a bitter contest among Democrats for state Senate majority leader on Wednesday stripped the winner of most of his powers, with the help of the small Republican minority. Nineteen supporters of Sen. John J. Bevilacqua joined seven of the chamber's nine Republicans to take charge on the second day of the 1989 session. Sen. David R. Carlin Jr., who defeated Bevilacqua for the majority leadership by a 22-19 vote of Senate Democrats in November, was stripped of most of his formal powers, including the right to name committee chairmen and control the flow of business on the floor. The Bevilacqua forces elected their own slate of committee chairmen, but agreed to accommodate some requests from Carlin backers for particular committee assignments. Bevilacqua retained his position as Judiciary Committee chairman. The Republicans, who have been badly outnumbered in the Rhode Island Senate for most of the past 50 years, won the right for the minority leader to unilaterally force bills to a vote. ``We did what we had to do,'' said Minority Whip Ann H. Hanson. ``Look at this as a political coup. That's what it was. We didn't ask for it. It came to us.'' Carlin and Bevilacqua avidly sought the support of the Republicans, who held the votes necessary to give one side or the other a majority of the Senate's 50 members. The major changes Wednesday were adopted 26-24. Both sides offered similar concessions, but Hanson said Bevilacqua's offer was earlier and more specific. In an occasionally heated debate, Carlin's supporters charged Bevilacqua was seeking revenge for the nasty tone of the campaign for the majority leadership. ``He didn't deserve to win and he doesn't know how to lose,'' charged Sen. William C. O'Neill. Bevilacqua said after the debate that he would seek peace with Carlin, but would also ask to be included in some of the majority leader's traditional prerogatives, such as representing the Senate in budget negotiations with the House and the governor. ``We will not interfere or create roadblocks,'' Bevilacqua said. ``The people's business comes first.'' Carlin would not comment on Bevilacqua's demand but said the Senate as a whole would be weakened by the conflict. ``Instead of one voice who can speak effectively for the Senate, we now have three factions,'' he said. Bevilacqua and Republican leaders said they did not plan to continue their alliance by working together on legislation. ``This is not a marriage. This is a long weekend at the very most,'' Hanson said. 
A military hearing was held Wednesday for an officer facing charges stemming from the death of a Marine who was left in a California desert at the end of a military exercise. The Article 32 hearing, the equivalent of a civilian grand jury hearing, recessed indefinitely after hearing testimony against 1st Lt. Allen Lawson, who is is charged with disobeying a lawful order of a logistics officer, Capt. Donald Edwards. Lawson allegedly failed to give Edwards a copy of a roster of Marines on checkpoint duty, including Lance Cpl. Jason Rother, before the roster was posted. Rother, a road guide, disappeared Aug. 30 in the Mojave Desert after a combined arms exercise at the Marine base at Twentynine Palms, Calif. He was reported missing the next day, and his skeletal remains were found Dec. 4. Two other officers face courts-martial in the case. The Article 32 hearing officer will review the evidence presented Wednesday and determine if Lawson faces court-martial, administrative action or if charges will be dropped. During the Wednesday hearing, additional charges of drunken driving and drunkenness were brought against Lawson stemming from a Dec. 23 incident in Jacksonville. He also was charged with driving with a revoked license and with an open malt beverage container in his vehicle. Lawson was earlier accused of willful disobedience of an order to post road guides in pairs and dereliction of duty. Those charges are pending. Sgt. Christopher P. Clyde, Rother's platoon sergeant, will be tried by a special court-martial starting Jan. 10, according to Maj. Stuart Wagner, director of Lejeune's Joint Public Affairs Office. Clyde is charged with dereliction of duty and disobeying a lawful order of the company commander, Capt. Michael Henderson, not to allow anyone special liberty without prior approval of the battalion commander. That allegation involves special liberty allegedly granted by Clyde to Sgt. Thomas B. Turnell, Rother's squad leader. Turnell's special court-martial is scheduled to start Jan. 24. He is accused of dereliction of duty and unauthorized absence. 
President George Sokomanu was ordered held for another week on Wednesday after impeachment proceedings against him were postponed by a cyclone, diplomats and news reports said. Sokomanu, president of the South Pacific island chain since 1980, is charged with inciting mutiny after his aborted attempt Dec. 21 to overthrow the elected government of Prime Minister Walter Lini. The charge carries a maximum of life imprisonment. Sokomanu was ordered held without bail until his next appearance before the Supreme Court on Jan. 13, Radio Vanuatu said. Five rebel politicians involved in the failed coup also were ordered held for nine more days, the state-run radio said. Radio Vanuatu said 50 supporters of the group filled the court building. Diplomats and news reports said impeachment proceedings against Sokomanu were delayed because of a cyclone that battered nearby New Caledonia the day before, causing two deaths. The reports said some members of the Electoral College were unable to reach the capital because of heavy seas and torrential rain. Under Vanuatu's constitution, three quarters of the college, which includes members of parliament and the heads of 11 local government councils, are required to form a quorum. The Electoral College is expected to meet Tuesday and formalize moves to dismiss the president from his mainly ceremonial post, the diplomats said on condition of anonimity. The five politicians include the president's nepher, Barak Sope, whom Sokomanu tried to install as prime minister. Sope and Lini have been locked in a leadership struggle for the past year. Lini has governed the former Anglo-French New Hebrides since independence in 1980. 
Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev told a visiting Iranian delegation on Wednesday that the Soviet Union will soon permit free practice of religion, Tehran broadcast reported. It said he made the comment at a meeting in Moscow with Iranians who gave him a message from Iran's revolutionary patriarch, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. The broadcast, monitored in Nicosia, did not elaborate. It did not disclose the contents of the message to Gorbachev but quoted Ayatollah Javadi Amoli, Khomeini's special envoy and the delegation leader, as saying that ``Khomeini is a religious leader, and his message is in accordance with his status.'' The television also quoted Ahmed Khomeini, son of the ayatollah, as saying the message praised Gorbachev's bold initiatives and realistic handling of world politics. An excerpt from the letter read: ``It is clear to everyone that from now on communism will be found only in the books about political history,'' the television quoted the younger Khomeini as saying. The message discussed the Moslem religion at length and urged Gorbachev to seriously think about and explore Islam, the television reported the patriarch's son as saying. 
Keebler Co., bowing to consumer concerns about cholesterol, announced Wednesday it will eliminate certain oils from its Keebler-brand cookies, crackers and snack foods. The action follows similar announcements by Pepperidge Farm Inc. and other manufacturers, who were prodded by a group called National Heart Savers. In addition to removing tropical oils and lard from its products, Keebler said it would begin listing nutritional values on packages of its products. Tropical oils, made with products like coconut or palm kernels, and lard are high in saturated fats, which can be converted by the body into artery-blocking cholesterol. ``We're extremely proud to respond to consumer concerns about these ingredients by replacing them with more healthful oils,'' said Thomas M. Garvin, Keebler president and chief executive officer. Keebler said its products refashioned with vegetable oils, which are lower in saturated fat, should begin appearing on store shelves in March. By the end of 1989, no Keebler product will contain tropical oil, lard or beef fat, said Stuart Greenblatt, a Keebler spokesman. Greenblatt said reformulating the food products would not affect consumer prices. Last week, Pepperidge Farm Inc. promised to remove tropical oils from its products, including its popular ``Original Goldfish'' crackers, due to consumer health concerns. Kellog Co. announced Dec. 12 that it had stopped using tropical oils in its Cracklin' Oat Bran cereal. Sunshine Biscuits Inc. announced Nov. 16 that it would remove palm oil and palm kernel from cookie and cracker products. Phil Sokolof, founder of National Heart Savers, says tropical oils have been popular among food manufacturers because they help extend the shelf life of food products. The 65-year-old Nebraska multimillionaire placed advertisements in newspapers in October criticizing manufacturers for advertising specific products as healthy or cholesterol-free when they are ``poisoning'' Americans with saturated fats. Cholesterol is a form of fat, contained in many foods, that is deposited in artery linings. Doctors have said oils high in saturated fat cause the body to produce more cholesterol than it needs, resulting in blockages and hardening of the arteries and increased risk of heart disease. Keebler, headquartered in this western Chicago suburb, employs more than 8,000 people nationwide and said its annual sales measure more than $1 billion. 
Gunmen abducted two American missionaries during a religious service and shouted slogans for the release of a Colombia drug kingpin serving a life prison term in the United States, police and a church spokesman said Wednesday. The gunmen on Tuesday night seized pastors Roy Libby and Ricardo Grover in the town of La Florida and demanded freedom for Carlos Ledher Rivas, a leader of the Medellin drug cartel, said police in the southwest state of Cauca. In July last year, Lehder Rivas was sentenced in Jacksonville, Fla., to 135 years in prison and fined $350,000 for smuggling tons of cocaine into the United States. Hector Pardo, director of the Evangelical Federation of Colombia, said in the capital, Bogota, that the gunmen initially seized three pastors, including Noemias Salazar, a Colombian they later released. Libby worked in Bogota and has been in Colombia for 20 years. Grover has lived in the country for 10 years, most recently in Medellin, the second-largest city in Colombia. Their ages and U.S. hometowns were not available. Pardo said the incident in La Florida, 180 miles southwest of Bogota, took place during a religious service but did not specify where it took place. He said the kidnappers also shouted slogans against the extradition of Ledher Rivas, who was arrested and sent to the United States in 1987 after a gun battle at his mansion in Medellin. 
Continued U.S. military aid depends on the the Argentine armed forces continuing to accept civilian rule, U.S. Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci told the defense chief. A brief letter, dated Dec. 22, was sent to Defense Minister Jose Horacio Jaunarena and was published Wednesday by the newspaper La Nacion. A spokesperson at the U.S. Embassy, speaking on condition of anonymity, confirmed the details. The letter came three weeks after the third military uprising in 20 months against the government of President Raul Alfonsin. Translated from Spanish to English, it said in part: ``The recent military unrest in Argentina and the potential threat that this type of development creates for democratic stability and civilian control are a cause of concern. ``We should be proud that with the return to democracy we have made notable progress in re-establishing a relationship of security that reflects our common interest in defending Western values within the framework of a government that is democratic and constitutional. ``Our capacity to maintain a bipartisian political consensus and continue in this direction depends on the continuation of this form of government in Argentina.'' As requested by Carlucci, Januarena read the letter aloud to new army chief Gen. Francisco Gassino, the heads of the navy and air force, and other top officials, La Nacion reported. Jaunarena has met several times with Carlucci, first in Carlucci's capacity as head of the National Security Council, then as defense secretary. Former Sen. John Tower will replace Carlucci in the Bush administration. Jaunarena visited Washington at Carlucci's invitation last October, and the two reviewed performance tests by Argentina's Pampa jet trainer that the U.S. Air Force is considering buying. Jaunarena also presented his army's request for help in making serviceable 250 U.S.-made armored personnel transport vehicles and 20 helicopters. The navy and air force have similar requests pending. U.S.-Argentine relations have undergone chills and thaws since the 1970s. President Jimmy Carter cut off military aid to protest the ``dirty war'' waged by the 1976-83 military regime in its brutal crackdown aimed at subversives. President Reagan supported Britain during the 74-day Falklands War in 1982. The conflict, which Argentina lost, was touched off by Argentina's invasion of the South Atlantic islands it claims and was trying to recover after 150 years of British sovereignty. Relations between Washington and Buenos Aires improved markedly after Alfonsin's election in October 1983 ended military rule. One demand made by insurrection leader Col. Mohamed Ali Seineldin was for a bigger military budget, though the key demand was ending the prosecution of officers for human rights abuses committed during the crackdown on urban terrorism. 
A gunman killed a Saudi Arabian diplomat as he walked back home in downtown Bangkok, police said Thursday. Saleh Abdullah Al-Maliki, 35, a third secretary at the Saudi Arabian Embassy, was killed instantly in the attack at about 2:45 p.m. Wednesday, said Maj. Gen. Veera Visuthakul. He was shot three times in the head with a pistol, and eight empty shells lay near his body, said Veera, commander of the Special Branch Police. Veera had just left the embassy on busy Sathorn Road and was killed after he turned into a side street that leads to his apartment building. The embassy and the apartment building are only a few hundred yards apart. Veera quoted witnesses as saying the diplomat and his killer were seen walking together just before the shooting. He said witnesses described the gunman as ``Arab-looking,'' but no arrests were made and no motive established. The diplomat arrived from India last year. His duties included handling applications from the thousands of Thais who travel to work in Saudi Arabia each year. 
Palace doctors gave Emperor Hirohito an emergency blood transfusion early Thursday morning after his blood pressure dropped sharply, palace officials said. Palace doctors gave the 87-year-old emperor 0.86 pint of blood after his systolic blood pressure fell to about 60, Kenji Maeda, spokesman for the Imperial Palace Agency, said in a regular morning news conference. An average person has a systolic blood pressure of about 120. With the latest transfusion, Hirohito has received 66.97 pints of blood since he fell ill in September. Maeda said doctors found no traces of blood discharge to indicate internal hemorrhaging. On Wednesday, palace physicians used a nasal tube to extract blood that had accumulated in Hirohito's stomach. Hirohito has discharged blood intermittently since Sept. 19, when he vomited a substantial amount of blood. Doctors have said they believe the bleeding originated in the upper intestinal region, where a bypass operation was performed in September 1987. On Thursday, Kyodo News Service quoted palace medical sources as saying that bleeding and low blood pressure have taken their toll on Hirohito and that blood transfusions were no longer as effective in checking the hemorrhaging. Hirohito has no political power but serves as a symbol of the unity of Japan. 
A rookie sheriff's deputy, slain with her own gun Wednesday at the Dallas County jail, had urged more hands-on training for county law enforcment officers. Deputy Suzanne Kays, 33, was on her second day of work when she was killed by a man at the Lew Sterrett Justice Center who was released 24 hours early, apparently due to a clerical error, City Manager Richard Knight said. The suspect, identified as Alfonzo Seward, is thought to have taken the deputy's gun after decking her with a punch and shot her several times at point-blank range. In a memorandum to the City Council, Knight said Seward had been released early due to a clerical error, and that the employee involved has been placed on paid administrative leave pending further investigation. Knight could not be located for comment late Wednesday afternoon. The shooting came less than a week after Kays, in evaluating her training, recommended that county law enforcement officers receive more hands-on training. Kays, in a statement dated Dec. 29, was mildly critical of the amount of training she received although she praised the quality of academy instructors and small class size. ``The hands-on training and practicals, I feel, are a very important part of a Peace Officer's training and I feel could have benefited more with extra time spent on these areas,'' she wrote. Our class was small, just 6, I really do not feel I could have benefitted as much as I have, if I had been in a larger class with less time allowed in some areas.'' Lt. Jack Watson, commander of the training academy, could not be reached for comment on Kays' evaluation of the county program, which is required from all recruits after they complete the more than 600 hours of training that spans 17 weeks. The shooting suspect, who was wounded by police gunfire, has been known to use at least three names and listed his address as a Dallas rescue mission and a restaurant where he was arrested, police said. The suspect _ who has identified himself on previous occasions as Alfonso Seward, Alfonso Steward and Alfonso Stewart _ had been released from jail less than eight hours before the slaying, which occurred shortly after 1 a.m. Wednesday. The 37-year-old suspect, who has claimed to be both from Oklahoma and Arkansas, was in serious condition at Parkland Memorial Hospital with shotgun wounds in his legs and groin. He has been charged with capital murder and is being held without bail. He also is being held for investigation of attempted capital murder and attempted murder. The slaying was the first at a Dallas jail since Jack Ruby shot accused presidential assassin Lee Harvey Oswald to death Nov. 24, 1963, in the basement of the Dallas City Jail, authorities said. Oswald had been arrested two days earlier in the shooting of President John F. Kennedy. Kays, who was single, was born in Cincinnati, Ohio, and served in the Army from May 1975 to January 1979. She joined the Sheriff's Department in December 1981 as a detention service officer. Kays was the first Dallas County law enforcement officer to die in the line of duty since a deputy was killed while investigating a burglary in 1982. Her death was the first slaying of a law enforcement officer in Dallas this year. 
President Fidel Castro offered a ringing endorsement of the policies of the Soviet Union on Wednesday night, seemingly putting to rest suggestions of disagreements in Soviet-Cuban relations. In a speech broadcast live on radio marking the 30th anniversary of his revolution, Castro also bitterly criticized U.S. policies toward Libya and other Third World countries, prompting a walkout by the chief U.S. diplomat in Havana, Jay Taylor. Castro spoke for nearly three hours before a crowd of tens of thousands at the site of a huge new exhibit commemorating the social and economic achievements of the revolution over the past three decades. In several speeches in recent months, Castro has made clear his unhappiness with the market-oriented reform policies of Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev, indicating concern Cuba may have ``difficulties'' as a result. But Wednesday night, Castro dismissed Soviet-Cuban differences as almost inconsequential and he praised the Kremlin's policies on peace and disarmament and said the two countries also see eye-to-eye on the problem of international debt. He also noted Moscow has been a staunch ally of the Cuban revolution during times of relative tranquillity and also when Castro's experiment has been under threat from the United States. ``We support the policies of peace of the Soviet Union,'' Castro said. He referred specifically to Gorbachev's efforts to reduce the risks of nuclear war. Castro criticized a threat by the Reagan administration to destroy a chemical weapons plant it claims Libya has built. Castro said the United States has the most powerful chemical weapons arsenal in the world and he asked, ``Why should it deny that right to others?'' Shortly afterwards, Taylor walked out of the ceremony in apparent protest over Castro's remarks. Castro made no direct reference to the incident Wednesday in which U.S. fighter planes downed two Libyan warplanes off the Libyan coast. Castro was interrupted a number of times by applause from the huge crowd, which gathered in late afternoon in an area adjacent to exhibition highlighting the achievements of the revolution that toppled dictator Fulgencio Batista on Jan. 1, 1959. The exhibition in south Havana near Lenin Park includes about 45 outdoor exhibits portraying Cuban advances in such fields as nuclear energy, agriculture and other endeavors. Castro made an appearance Jan. 1 in the east coast city of Santiago, which he regards as the cradle of the revolution because of its progressive heritage. Many of those attending took part in the work brigades which constructed the exhibit, known as ExpoCuba. Among the dignitaries sharing the platform with Castro were Nicaraguan President Daniel Ortega, Namibian rebel leader Sam Nujoma and Czechoslovak Communist Party leader Milos Jakes. 
President Reagan has decided to accept the Soviet Union's proposal for hosting an international conference on human rights in 1991, sources said. U.S. agreement to participate in the conference signals American support for Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev's internal reforms and sets the stage for the opening of new East-West negotiations on cutting troops and arms in Europe. The human rights conference and the European arms negotiations are linked, and Secretary of State George P. Shultz has recommended they proceed based on Soviet advances in human rights, a U.S. official told The Associated Press on Tuesday. President Reagan, on vacation in California, decided Tuesday to accept Shultz's advice, said another official, who also spoke on condition he not be identified. 
Gov. Michael Dukakis says his decision to forgo a chance for a record fourth term has nothing to do with his prospects in national politics, but admitted it's ``exceedingly difficult'' to run for president as governor. With two years remaining in his term, Dukakis unexpectedly announced Tuesday he would not seek re-election in 1990. He parried questions about his political future, however, saying only he intended to be active in national affairs and would not rule out another run for the White House. ``Public policy and public service is what I'm all about, it's what I love,'' Dukakis, 55, told a crowded news conference.``I've loved this office, and I still do.'' The defeated Democratic presidential candidate said his decision not to seek an unprecedented fourth term as Massachusetts' governor was not related to the 1988 presidential campaign or to a possible 1992 rematch against President-elect Bush. 
Physicians who treat women are being enlisted in a nationwide effort to aid battered women and help break a generational cycle that has caught some American families in a web of violence. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists is sending information to its 28,000 members to heighten their awareness of the problem of domestic violence and better enable them to help abused women. Surgeon General C. Everett Koop, who joined the group for its announcement of the campaign Tuesday, said stopping violence against women is a major part of the effort to end family violence, a cycle that often begins when someone is the victim of abuse and then grows up to become an abuser. ``It's obvious that if you're going to break that chain ... you've got to start with child abuse,'' Koop said. ``But you can't just wait for the three generations to work themselves out. You've got to take care of the elderly abused and you've got to take care of the battered women.'' 
Japanese companies likely will beat their U.S. rivals to the market with superconductor products unless government, industry and universities cooperate in long-range development, a White House panel says. Important profit-making uses for superconductivity are at least a decade away, but the United States cannot afford to leave them to chance because the Japanese do not, the advisory group said in its report to President Reagan on Tuesday. Today, Americans are probably ``neck-and-neck'' with the Japanese in basic scientific research on superconductivity, said Ralph Gomory, the chairman of the panel and the chief scientist of International Business Machines Corp. ``Everybody's just out of the gate. Ahead or behind doesn't matter. What matters is who's better structured to run,'' he said. 
Federal prosecutors unleashed a tough new law in their war on drug-dealing street thugs, hoping to send a repeat drug offender accused of possessing 150 grams of crack to prison with no chance of getting out. Richard Van Winrow, a 21-year-old reputed gang member, pleaded innocent Tuesday to three drug-related charges at his arraignment before U.S. District Judge Consuelo Marshall. ``The new law is being used to target gang members in the hopes of reducing drug sales and consumption,'' said the prosecutor, Special Assistant U.S. Attorney Lisa Lench. ``There's a hope there will be an impact on the street-gang drug problem.'' The charges against Winrow are believed to be the first filed under the anti-drug law President Reagan signed in November, Ms. Lench said. The law requires federal judges to impose life sentences with no hope of parole on defendants convicted of drug trafficking under certain circumstances. 
Glasnost brought a little more color into the lives of Soviet newspaper readers as Izvestia heralded with a front-page splash of green the opening of its pages to foreign advertisers. For decades, the same government daily had railed against capitalism in small, gray type. Now, it was introducing the Western sales pitch. ``French perfumes, French wines and the French effort to find comfort have been well-known to you for a long time,'' proclaimed Pechiney, a French firm that bought all of page five in Tuesday's ground-breaking edition. ``Now you have a chance to get more closely acquainted with industrial France,'' In a front-page announcement, Izvestia said the two pages of ads from European and U.S. companies were the first in a weekly effort ``to give Western businessmen the possibility to enter into direct dialogue with future Soviet partners who are trying to set up contacts with the foreign market.'' 
Tim Dunigan was an interested onlooker when the television series ``Lucas Tanner,'' about a former baseball player turned teacher, was filmed near his home. ``They filmed some of it in Webster Groves, Mo., where I grew up,'' said Dunigan. ``I was interested because I wanted to be a baseball player. I never thought about acting.'' Nevertheless, Dunigan did begin acting, at Webster College in St. Louis. He soon joined the St. Louis Repertory Co. Last year, Dunigan won out over more than 1,000 actors for the role of the new Davy Crockett in NBC's ``The Magical World of Disney.'' The role was originated by Fess Parker in the Frontierland segment of ``Disneyland'' in 1954-55. The latest chapter will be seen Sunday, Jan. 15. Crockett, who saves a young Creek Indian and becomes his guardian spirit, is caught in a moral dilemma when the Army plans to attack the youth's village during a sacred ceremony. ``My Davy Crockett is certainly different from Fess Parker's,'' Dunigan said during a brief visit in Los Angeles. The show is filmed in British Columbia. ``Fess Parker will always be Davy Crockett to a lot of people. I don't think people are going to forget him. I know I grew up watching him. But I think people can watch me and enjoy me as Davy Crockett, too. Actually, since I was born in 1955, I think of Fess Parker more as `Daniel Boone' (whom Parker played in the 1960s). The Davy Crockett I see was more of a Will Rogers of his time. He was a storyteller who liked to sit around and tell good stories. ``I think people want to see the legend. Still, we have to give it more reality. So there we are out in the woods. We have to tell a story that both children and adults can enjoy. It's the hardest thing I've ever done physically.'' At times, the role has called for Dunigan to run up a mountain wearing soaking wet leather clothing and carrying a heavy musket. Dunigan's Crockett is younger than Parker's, but the major difference is that in the past 30 years, views regarding Indians, ethnic minorities and women have changed. The upcoming episode reflects that change. In the past, it's doubtful that Crockett would have been sensitive to Indian sacred ceremonies. ``He did his share of Indian fighting,'' said Dunigan, ``but later when he was in Congress he tried to help Indians. I'm out in the woods. He's a hero. That's the way I play him. He's exciting. He tells you straight.'' Dunigan first came to Los Angeles for a pilot called ``Century City,'' in which he played Richard Kiley's son. ``I'd been doing musicals and had never been in front of a camera before,'' he said. ``You know what I liked about it? You could do it over again.'' Dunigan's last show was the syndicated series ``Captain Powers and the Soldiers of the Future,'' which was also made in Canada. In 1983 he was baby sitter to an orangutan in ``Mr. Smith.'' This monkey business didn't last very long. On ``Wizards and Warriors,'' he was Prince Dirk Blackpool's incompetent brother, Geoffrey. He was also the original Templeton ``Face'' Peck in ``The A-Team.'' He appeared in the pilot, but was replaced by Dirk Benedict in the long-running series. ``They said I was too young and too tall,'' said Dunigan, who's 6-foot-5. ``I look even younger on camera than I am. So it was difficult to accept me as a veteran of the Vietnam War, which ended when I was a sophomore in high school. It took me a while to get over it. I kept saying, `What did I do wrong?' The producer, Stephen Cannell, said I didn't do anything wrong, but I still felt it was my fault. George Peppard called to cheer me up. He said he had been replaced in `Dynasty' as the original Blake Carrington.'' Dunigan was filling in for a week or so as Skip on the soap opera ``The Young and the Restless'' when he auditioned for Davy Crockett. ``I replaced the actor playing Skip when he went into the hospital,'' he said. ``I didn't know the character. I'd have to drive out to the Disney Ranch for Davy Crockett. Then I'd drive to CBS Television City for the soap. I never knew which accent to do.'' 
Elsewhere in television: BABY-SITTING _ Julia Duffy (``Newhart'') and Dinah Manoff (``Empty Nest'') star in the suspense comedy ``The Cover Girl and the Cop'' on NBC on Monday, Jan. 16. Duffy plays a beautiful, frivolous model who witnesses a murder and Manoff is a tough, streetwise policewoman assigned as ``baby sitter'' to protect her. They soon pool their differences to save themselves and solve the crime. 
The Lutheran Church in East Germany is under increasing pressure from the nation's communist government to curb its support of human rights efforts and to disavow would-be emigres. ``The government at the moment appears to view all our efforts toward dialogue as destructive,'' Bishop Werner Leich, who heads the nation's Lutheran Church Conference, told The Associated Press in a recent interview. At a series of conferences last year, church leaders have called for dialogue with government officials on a variety of topics, including human rights issues, implementation of Soviet-style political reforms, education policies and alternative military service. Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's policy of glasnost, or openness, has been a frequent theme, and church leaders have criticized the nation's conservative leadership for rejecting outright the need for such a reform course. Church calls for change, including a loosening of the nation's tough foreign travel and emigration policies, have been rebuffed by the government, which has seized or censored several church publications in recent months. Human rights activists loosely allied with the church have been detained and questioned. Would-be emigres _ some of whom turned to the church for help 
have been imprisoned. Others have lost their jobs. Scores have been warned not to participate in silent vigils staged in front of churches to protest government decisions denying them exit visas. A church-sponsored international youth congress was also banned in November. State-run news media said the conference's proposed themes _ peace issues and discussions about reforms in the Soviet Union _ could have ``threatened church-state relations.'' The Communist Party's chief ideologues have charged that the church has overstepped its bounds and have cautioned it to stick to religious issues and stay out of politics. About 80 percent of the population is Lutheran. ``The East German Communist Party has traditionally been orthodox, intolerant and inflexible,'' says a Western diplomatic source. ``In regard to its (present) behavior toward the Lutheran Church, it's certainlyliving up to that tradition.'' Bishop Leich said the government's reaction to the church's efforts to discuss social and political problems has been needlessly harsh and that its refusal to discuss problems has led to a certain resignation among East Germans. ``I have the impression that in many instances the political leadership is no longer in touch with reality,'' Leich said. Leich ran afoul of the communist leadership when he declared recently that socialism in East Germany should show a more human face, in a reference to a term used to describe short-lived reforms in Czechoslovakia in 1968. The church has traditionally sought to work together with the state in resolving problems from within, its willingness to compromise summed up in agreements with the state that defined the role of the ``church in socialism.'' That view guided largely conformative church policy during the difficult decades of reconstruction after World War II. But Leich said times have changed. ``Discussion has now become more important than simply following orders,'' Leich said. ``We have always believed that our church has the task and responsibility of helping to determine and to shape our society and our nation. To do that, one must speak openly and critically.'' But over the past year, the church has found itself increasingly at odds with the government over the issue of ``ausreisewillige,'' _ or those who want to leave the country. Growing dissatisfaction over economic and political conditions has led to a record number of applications from East Germans who want to leave the country for neighboring capitalist West Germany. According to estimates by the West German government and human rights groups, more than 750,000 people have filed applications to leave East Germany. Counting family members, the total amounts to 1.5 million of the nation's 16 million population. In keeping with its position to change the system from within, church leaders have been careful not to encourage East Germans to leave the country, arguing instead for patience and renewed commitment to the community. ``We try to give people strength, but it's hard, very hard,'' said a Lutheran pastor, whose congregation in a small town outside Dresden has dwindled over the years as more an more families have left for the West. ``You can't hold a community together with people who already have one foot in the federal republic (West Germany),'' said the pastor, who asked that his name not be used. At a church conference earlier this year, participants urged the government to loosen its travel and emigration restrictions, saying ``we'll want to stay, once we're allowed to leave.'' 
The American Baptist Churches have decided to maintain their historic ecumenical ties, but also to initiate a new one. The denomination's general board voted to reaffirm membership in the National Council of Churches and World Council of Churches, but also to become an official observer in the National Association of Evangelicals. The 1.6 million-member denomination had not previously been linked to the NAE, a conservative evangelical body which does not permit full membership to churches belonging to the NCC or WCC. Some American Baptists had sought withdrawal from the NCC and WCC. Paul Nichols of Richmond, Va., characterized the compromise decision as ``conciliar, broad, inclusive _ an appropriate stance for our denomination.'' The decision culminated four years of monitoring and critiquing the NCC and WCC. 
Church Women United, an ecumenical coalition of Christian women dedicated to eliminating poverty and promoting peace and justice, has named Patricia J. Rumer as its new general director. Ms. Rumer has been regional secretary for Latin America and the Caribbean for the United Church of Christ's Board of World Ministries. She is to assume the new post next August on retirement of the current general director, Doris Anne Younger, becoming the eighth woman to lead the national organization in its 47-year history. Church Women United has 1,750 local units representing women of Protestant, Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox denominations. 
While modern technology has tended to turn the world into a mutually influencing ``global village,'' that may have some negative consquences, according to participants in a special church consultation here. Several speakers told Christian executives who deal with work in the Third World that effects of mass media and technology tend to erode cultural identity. The Rev. Patrick Anthony, director of a Roman Catholic pastoral center here, said people are losing their culture due to Western influence. 
The first year of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, established at the start of 1988 through merger of three Lutheran bodies, has ``been a good year,'' says its chief executive, Bishop Herbert W. Chilstrom. It hasn't been ``an easy year, but a good one,'' he said. ``We have had to make some painful adjustments in 1988 as dreams have been fitted to reality. But we will make it. And we will make it in good stable condition if all of us at the congregational level put forth our best efforts.'' 
U.S. Roman Catholicism in 1988 distributed $4.3 million to more than 300 pastoral projects in Mexico, the Caribbean and Central and South America, says the Latin American committee of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops. The funds for the projects are derived from an annual collection for the church in Latin America. 
Buddhists on Jan. 1 consecrated a new 11-foot-high statue of the Buddha, covered with sheets of gold leaf, in their shrine room at Woodstock's Tibetan monastery. 
Some evangelicals in a mainline denomination _ the United Church of Christ _ say they are starting their own missions work because the denomination isn't doing enough to win new believers. Barbara Weller, assistant director of Biblical Witness Fellowship, says it decided to create a special missions committee after research indicated extensive disenchantment with the church's official missions work. Denominational officials said the move could hurt the church's missions efforts. The action was similar to that of conservatives in the United Methodist Church, which five years ago formed an unofficial separate mission society to send missionaries abroad. 
Among all the New Year's resolutions that can be made and broken, few carry a more ominous burden than the simple ``This year I'm going to get organized.'' Even in a household of modest means, the paperwork pile can easily get out of control _ bills, pay stubs, bank statements, canceled checks and too many others to mention. At the start of a new year, the flow reaches flood stage with W-2s, 1099s and the other trappings of income taxes. Most people don't have many alternatives to coping with this problem, whether their filing system reposes in a single desk drawer or a sophisticated computer program. You can pass along the burden of filling out your tax forms to some trusted friend or paid preparer. But there is no way to dodge the legal responsibility of being able to document where you stand with Uncle Sam. ``The burden of proof for the accuracy of your return is directly on you _ not your accountant, tax adviser or tax preparer,'' notes the accounting firm of Arthur Andersen &amp; Co. in its ``Tax Guide and Planner'' for 1989. Tax laws passed in recent years have only served to increase the emphasis on record-keeping. These days, if you inadvertently fail to report the interest earned on some small, forgotten bank account, the Internal Revenue Service can quickly catch the omission. Then, it can demand not only tax payment for the neglected amount but interest on the balance due and maybe penalties as well. Once you get your records in order, of course, there's the continuing challenge of keeping them organized. What to do, say, with that file marked ``Checking Account _ 1979''? The IRS usually has three years from the filing deadline to audit an individual income tax return. The limit is six years if your income is underreported by more than 25 percent. And there is no statute of limitations in cases where anyone has filed a fraudulent return or no return at all. Let's suppose you are reasonably confident you reported all your 1979 income and didn't commit any kind of deceit in doing so. The deadline has passed for auditing your '79 return, so you can go ahead and throw that folder away... But WAIT! Does it contain receipts for improvements you made to your house? Statements from a mutual fund in which you still have an investment? Documents showing non-deductible contributions to a retirement savings plan? Things like these could have an important bearing on the taxes you might owe in some future year. Their rightful place is in a ``permanent'' set of records independent of year-by-year files. ``In general,'' Arthur Andersen's advisers conclude, ``when you're in doubt about the importance of any record, keep it.'' If all this makes you feel like an unpaid clerk-secretary in thrall to the government, don't despair. Good records can have other purposes and benefits. In the course of compiling and maintaining them, you can keep yourself and your loved ones informed about where you stand financially _ how you are progressing toward some goal, or just ``where does all the money go?'' Records may also be vital to the orderly disposition of your affairs should you die or become disabled. ``What would happen if someone needed to understand your affairs but couldn't discuss them with you?'' Arthur Andersen observes. ``That day will unavoidably come, which is a powerful argument for maintaining clear, accurate, accessible records of your tax and financial life.'' 
How do you keep the kids down on the farm after they've seen the big bucks and high life? In West Germany, as in many other places, you usually don't. This is Europe's richest country and its living standard is among the highest in the world. The family farm has a tough time holding its own in such an atmosphere. When West Germany was born in 1949 it had 1,646,751 farms, but that has changed dramatically. ``By the end of 1987 there were only 382,800 farms still operating full time, with another 280,200 part-time farmers who held other jobs,'' said Peter Neuling, an Agriculture Ministry statistician. West Germany is heavily industrialized and densely populated, with nearly 62 million people living in an area about the size of Oregan. The average farm is just under 70 acres and a part-time farmer generally works less than 15 acres, Neuling said in a telephone interview. Farms are closing because industry is flourishing, Neuling said, and that ``is a sign our economy is strong.'' But Alfred Kunze, 64, and other farmers say the trend is killing a tradition important to national self-sufficiency. ``We're not going to have anyone following in our footsteps; there won't be any experienced young to take over,'' Kunze said at his home in Auringen, about 35 miles west of Frankfurt. He acknowledged farming had become risky because of overproduction throughout Europe. Kunze said his 36-year-old son Hubert ``wanted to be a farmer but I told him to study another business just in case.'' Hubert Kunze now is a computer specialist and normally works an eight-hour day. His father observed wryly: ``Farmers can't count on eight-hour days.'' As a member of the European Economic Community, West Germany must import farm products from other members to help balance the industrial goods it exports to them. That shrinks markets and prices for West German farmers, said Alfred Kunze, who runs a 3,500-tree fruit farm in central Hesse state. Taxes to support health, retirement, unemployment and other social benefits also make farming more difficult here than in other West European nations where labor and overhead are cheaper. As costs rose, West German farmers tried to close the gap with increased crop yields and animal feed containing hormones, Kunze said. He said use of new fertilizers had doubled grain production since World War II and cited the example of wheat, which went from an average of about 30 bushels an acre to more than 50. ``To speed up the growth of calves raised to produce light-colored meat for veal, which the customers demand, the animals were fed milk-base products spiked with hormones,'' Kunze said. Now, however, environmentalists complain that chemical fertilizers pollute waterways and regulations forbid the use of hormones in animal feed. In an attempt to cut production, the government is paying farmers about $250 an acre to take land out of cultivation. More than 25,000 farmers have submitted applications let roughly 425,000 acres lie fallow in the 1988-1989 growing season. ``This is going to turn German farmland into fruitless plains,'' said Klara Schecke, 60, whose family operates a dairy farm with 70 head of cattle near Bad Orb, 25 miles east of Frankfurt. Hiring help is difficult, even though 8.1 percent of West Germans were unemployed at the end of November. Mrs. Schecke said it was almost impossible to find a young person willing to learn farming as an apprentice. An advertisement in Hessebauer, the Hesse state weekly farm magazine, accomplished nothing, she said. ``In the latest edition there were 12 advertisments seeking apprentices, Mrs. Schecke told an interviewer. ``We checked, there hasn't been a single response. The young see absolutely no future in farming anymore.'' Manfred Mannel, a 32-year-old farmer from Schenklengsfeld, 70 miles northeast of Frankfurt, said much the same: ``We've advertised since last year to hire someone to help. It's hopeless.'' Eberhard Mann, spokesman for the Federal Labor Office, said unemployment among people under 20 was 5.1 percent in November, but ``they're not interested in farming because it's a shrinking business.'' 
Three graduates of Cambridge University in England were among the signers of the American Declaration of Independence. There wasn't even one from Oxford University. Score that Cambridge 3, Oxford 0, says Mark Kaplanoff, an American lecturer in history at Cambridge. Ancient history, scoffs Henry Drucker of Oxford. ``Five current members of the U.S. Senate are Oxford men. Score that 5-to-3 for Oxford.'' Whatever the final score, the 780-year-old rivalry between England's two premier seats of learning has spilled across the Atlantic, indeed has gone global. And now the contest is taking a new form: fundraising. A Yank at Oxford, Drucker is not only a booster. He is also the university's fundraiser. Appointed in 1987, he is the first person to hold such a post since the founding of Britain's oldest university 800 years ago. Cambridge set up a fundraising office in 1988. The fact is that both institutions are a bit low on endowments. And so the two queens of Britain's 45-university chessboard are starting to do what 3,000 American colleges and universities have been doing with vigor for generations: hit their alumni and any other likely prospects for donations. All Britain's universities are reacting to a squeeze for funds under the pennypinching government of Oxford alumna Margaret Thatcher. In 1981, Oxford _ which traditionally honored the 24 British prime ministers it has produced thus far _ expressed its academic displeasure with Mrs. Thatcher by denying her an honorary degree. Last October, Oxford Vice Chancellor Sir Patrick Neill, complaining that the university has more than 100 academic posts vacant for lack of money, launched a worldwide Campaign for Oxford. Its goal is to raise 220 million pounds, or $395 million, in five years. Cambridge, not in such dire straits, is working on a Cambridge 2000 Plan for the 21st century. ``We are plowing a quieter furrow, our needs are less desperate,'' said William Squire of Cambridge in a telephone interview. Squire became Cambridge's first development director since 1200 A.D. in 1988. ``Both universities were encouraged for 60 years to depend on the British government for more than half their funds,'' said Stephen Bragg, who heads the Cambridge office of the American Friends of Cambridge University, a group of U.S. alumni who, unasked, have raised $12 million for their alma mater since 1966. ``Under the state-funded regime both developed greatly the range of their teaching and research. Cambridge lists the discovery of DNA, the development of radio-astronomy and pioneering work in superconductivity as examples of speculative research which paid off,'' Bragg said. ``But he who pays the piper calls the tune,'' he added, ``and British universities are learning that in allowing government subsidy for teaching and research to rise to more than 50 percent of their total income, much of their freedom has been lost.'' So the race is on to raise private donations around the world and achieve the sort of independence that comes, for example, from Harvard University's $4-billion endowment. By comparison, Oxford's endowment is equivalent to $14.4 million. British universities' fundraising techniques look a little rusty from disuse. One of Drucker's first discoveries on taking office at Oxford was that the university did not even have an alumni roster. Jeanne Sigler of Jeanne Sigler Associates, a New York-based firm specializing in nonprofit fundraising, noted, ``The alumni list is the lifeblood of the American university. ... English attitudes have traditionally differed.'' Cambridge did have a list of worldwide graduates, including its 60 Nobel prizewinners (Oxford's Nobelist score, by the way, is 24). But no addresses. So how many Cambridge grads are out there? ``About 100,000 to 120,000,'' said Squire, ``depending on the mortality tables you use. We will be trying to reach them all.'' With a one-year headstart, Drucker, the son of a department store owner in Rutherford, N.J., is already reaching Oxford alumni with the efficiency of a Yankee trader. ``We now have a mailing list of 120,000 graduates around the globe,'' he said. ``That's more listings than the city of Oxford's phone book. We expect to have 140,000 by 1989, including 8,000 in the United States.'' Cambridge has about 5,000 American graduates, who set up the American Friends group. ``We now have similar organizations in Japan, Singapore and other places,'' said Squire. ``We have students from 91 countries.'' Drucker has two people working for him in the United States; Squire doesn't have any yet. That compares with Columbia University's fundraising staff of 150 and Princeton's 200. Both Oxford and Cambridge have already successfully tapped international corporations for major funding. At Oxford, Squibb Corp. of the United States has contributed $36 million to set up a pharmacological research laboratory, while Monsanto Corp. and G.D. Searle and Co. are giving $10.8 million for a biological institute. Cambridge has raised funds from Japan and the United States to back new professorships. U.S.-based SmithKline Beckman Corp. has donated $1.8 million for research on AIDS at Cambridge's School of Clinical Medicine. ``For 700 years we successfully raised funds in England,'' said Squire, ``and after two generations of government subsidies we are now going back to our roots.'' ``But it's not only money,'' he said during a visit to New York that he insisted was not a fundraising trip. ``You have those three Cambridge men who signed the American Declaration of Independence. At this time, exhibits from Cambridge's Fitzwilliam Museum are beginning a yearlong tour of American cities. It's a matter of shared heritage and values over the centuries. ``Besides,'' he added, ``as you know, John Harvard was a Cambridge man.'' Chalk up the founder of Harvard University as one more point for Cambridge. Ancient history again, said Drucker, adding that Oxford ``is the alma mater of the scholars who currently head New York University, Georgetown University, the University of Pittsburgh, Mount Holyoke, Pomona and Johns Hopkins.'' Chalk up a few more points for Oxford. 
Elsie May Ashford hadn't seen her brother in 81 years _ not since she was sent as a toddler to live with her uncle. A few weeks ago the Salvation Army reunited them. Tracing missing persons is just one of an array of social services the church-in-uniform has taken on in a history of good works that began with a soup kitchen in London's squalid East End in 1866. The organization and its social-evangelical work has since spread to countries around the world. Although its image is still defined by its military uniforms, brass bands and bell jingling at collection pots, the 2.5-million-member Army tries to adapt to the times. Recent innovations include budgeting advice for credit card junkies, and free electronic telephone cards for down-and-outs and runaways to phone home. The missing persons bureau handles 5,000 cases a year and claims a 70-percent success rate. After 83-year-old Mrs. Ashford's son wrote in for help, it took Maj. Colin Fairclough and his 24 assistants just two weeks to trace William Pring, 85, who was living about 150 miles away. But the missing persons bureau won't handle cases where one of the parties seeks a divorce. Although the Army regards itself first and foremost as a church, its reputation rests heavily on its social work. ``Through our social work we are seen as being prepared to go where other people are perhaps not quite prepared to go,'' says Commissioner Harry Read, who directs evangelical work in Britain. ``We're the world's largest volunteer organization,'' said spokesman Capt. Charles King. ``But at the same time, if our social work was enormously professional but no one was hearing about Christianity, we would be failing in our first task.'' William Booth, the builder's son and born-again Christian who founded the organization in 1865, envisaged an army of soldiers with military ranks to wage war on Satan with Bibles and compassion. Booth, the first ``general,'' never meant to found a church or a social service. He simply wanted the poor to go to church. ``He saw himself as a poor man's Billy Graham,'' but most churches wouldn't have the smelly new converts and ``whether he liked it or not, he had a church on this hands,'' said Read in an interview in his spartan office at the Army's world headquarters near the Thames River. Finding hungry people unreceptive to preaching, Booth opened a soup kitchen. The first hostel opened in 1888. Bodyguards were hired to ward off mocking crowds who would pelt Army preachers with eggs, fish and rocks. The first group of guards happened to play musical instruments, so it became the first brass band. The name, Salvation Army, was adopted in 1878, and from the outset it stressed family, with Booth setting the example. His son Bramwell succeeded him as general when he died in 1912, and son Ballington and daughters Emma and Evangeline opened chapters in the United States. The present general is Eva Burrows, an Australian and the first woman since Evangeline Booth to head the Army. Today 60 percent of the soldiers have relatives in the Army. The organization has a 50-million-pound ($92 million) budget and works in 89 countries, running hostels for 30,000 homeless, schools for 280,000 children, and hospitals and homes for lepers, the blind, handicapped, suicidal and sick. Among British charities, it spends the least on administration and fund-raising, according to the non-profit Charities Aid Commission. But changing mores and the growth of professional social services have tended to eclipse some aspects of Salvation Army work. Its 25,000 officers haven't increased in number since 1972. It no longer caters to unwed mothers, because they now more often choose abortion or motherhood. And roughly one-fifth of its 950 beds in London remain empty each night. Some criticize their hostels as ``institutional'' and object to the 6.90-pound ($12.60) fee for a bed and breakfast, although the government reimburses the sum and the truly needy aren't charged. ``People find it quite authoritarian,'' said Lorna Reith, a worker with a small London homeless charity. ``I think it's a way of forcing their religion on people.'' The Army strongly denies any element of coercion, but sees a basic duty to spread the gospel. ``We are not first and foremost a social service organization with a church tagged on,'' said Maj. Colin Hunt, who heads one of the army's 14,000 corps (churches). The Army upholds mainstream Christian beliefs, but eschews such rituals as baptism and Holy Communion. Ministers are called officers and services are called meetings. ``I would like more and more people to know we're an evangelical Christian church,'' said Hunt, ``because the more people who know, the more people will come.'' 
Some evangelicals in a mainline denomination _ the United Church of Christ _ say they are starting their own missions work because the denomination isn't doing enough to win new believers. Barbara Weller, assistant director of Biblical Witness Fellowship, says it decided to create a special missions committee after research indicated extensive disenchantment with the church's official missions work. Denominational officials said the move could hurt the church's missions efforts. The action was simimilar to that of conservatives in the United Methodist Church, which five years ago formed an unofficial separate mission society to send missionaries abroad. 
Buddhists on Jan. 1 consecrated a new 11-foot-high statue of the Buddha, covered with sheets of gold leaf, in their shrine room at Woodstock's Tibetan monastery. 
U.S. Roman Catholicism in 1988 distributed $4.3 million to more than 300 pastoral projects in Mexico, the Caribbean and Central and South America, says the Latin American committee of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops. The funds for the projects are derived from an annual collection for the church in Latin America. 
The first year of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, established at the start of 1988 through merger of three Lutheran bodies, has ``been a good year,'' says its chief executive, Bishop Herbert W. Chilstrom. It hasn't been ``an easy year, but a good one,'' he said. ``We have had to make some painful adjustments in 1988 as dreams have been fitted to reality. But we will make it. And we will make it in good stable condition if all of us at the congregational level put forth our best efforts.'' 
While modern technology has tended to turn the world into a mutually influencing ``global village,'' that may have some negative consquences, according to participants in a special church consultation here. Several speakers told Christian executives who deal with work in the Third World that effects of mass media and technology tend to erode cultural identity. The Rev. Patrick Anthony, director of a Roman Catholic pastoral center here, said people are losing their culture due to Western influence. 
Church Women United, an ecumenical coalition of Christian women dedicated to eliminating poverty and promoting peace and justice, has named Patricia J. Rumer as its new general director. Ms. Rumer has been regional secretary for Latin America and the Caribbean for the United Church of Christ's Board of World Ministries. She is to assume the new post next August on retirement of the current general director, Doris Anne Younger, becoming the eighth woman to lead the national organization in its 47-year history. Church Women United has 1,750 local units representing women of Protestant, Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox denominations. 
The American Baptist Churches have decided to maintain their historic ecumenical ties, but also to initiate a new one. The denomination's general board voted to reaffirm membership in the National Council of Churches and World Council of Churches, but also to become an official observer in the National Association of Evangelicals. The 1.6 million-member denomination had not previously been linked to the NAE, a conservative evangelical body which does not permit full membership to churches belonging to the NCC or WCC. Some American Baptists had sought withdrawal from the NCC and WCC. Paul Nichols of Richmond, Va., characterized the compromise decision as ``conciliar, broad, inclusive _ an appropriate stance for our denomination.'' The decision culminated four years of monitoring and critiquing the NCC and WCC. 
From their clifftop campus in Hoboken, N.J., the 593 foreign students at Stevens Institute of Technology have a grandstand view of the New York City skyline and the battery of skyscrapers around Wall Street. To some, it's like a vision of the Promised Land _ and many are tempted to stay in this country to start careers. Currently, 356,200 students from other countries attend more than 2,000 colleges and universities across America, and as many as one-fifth of them do in fact stay on. ``Our best estimate is that in recent years only 80 to 85 percent of foreign students in the United States returned home,'' says Jack Reichard, vice president of the Washington-based National Association for Foreign Student Affairs. Moreover, 50-60 percent of foreign students studying science and engineering _ a vital area for their countries as well as the United States _ decide to stay, according to a study by the National Science Foundation. About 40 percent of non-American Ph.D. recipients in science and engineering seek jobs in this country, and about 40 percent of American university science and engineering faculty members under the age of 35 are now foreign nationals, according to the National Academy of Sciences. Whether these young intellectuals of the world should stay on to make their careers in America or return home is a question in growing contention. Their individual decisions to stay or to go home could have a considerable impact on world affairs. Leon Febres Cordero, who earned a Bachelor of Engineering degree at Stevens in 1953, completed a four-year term as president of Ecuador last August. Niklos Nemeth, an economist with postgraduate training at Harvard University, was named in November to be prime minister of Hungary. Benazir Bhutto, who has a BA from Radcliffe College, became prime minister of Pakistan, elected in December as the first woman ever to head a Moslem government. In dozens of other nations of every political persuasion, graduates of American universities have occupied positions of influence and power in politics, industry and other fields. Foreign students who decided to stay on in the United States have been no less successful. Shanghai-born An Wang, who was sent to study physics at Harvard by President Chiang Kai-shek of Nationalist China, stayed on in the United States to found Wang Laboratories, a major scientific company, and make a fortune estimated by Forbes magazine at $365 million. The average foreign university student attends courses for about 3.5 years, Reichard said in a telephone interview. So it may be estimated, with about 350,000 foreign students in the country, that approximately 100,000 new university-level students enter the country each year. According to U.S immigration figures, about 20,000 of these foreign youths, among the world's best and brightest, trade in their student visas for immigration cards. The foreign students come from 186 countries and territories. Two thirds of them are from developing nations, where in many cases a depressing paradox awaits them on their return home: there is a desperate need for their knowledge, but jobs are scarce and poorly paid even at the advanced level they have achieved. So the temptation to remain in the United States is strong. Making it even stronger is the encouragement of some American business and academic leaders, acutely aware of a shortage of American-born science students in particular. According to the Council on Competitiveness, the United States could face a shortfall of 500,000 American-born scientists and engineers by the year 2010 due to retirements and the declining number of American students choosing careers in these fields. The Council, composed of 151 chief executives of industry, labor and higher education, also noted in a report last July that 1,300 to 1,800 engineering positions are vacant even now at American universities. ``How can we replenish these faculty positions?'' asks Stevens President Harold J. Raveche. ``It takes 10,000 high school students expressing an interest in a science or engineering major to assure us of 20 doctorates.'' ``We should talk about our education deficit rather than about our budget deficit,'' says Kenneth Wilson, 1982 winner of the Nobel physics prize. ``We need math and science teachers,'' he said during a forum on U.S. competitiveness at Stevens. The academic gap is being filled by an increasing number of professors from other countries, particularly India, Japan and other Asian nations. Sixty percent of all foreign students in the United States are in engineering, mathematics, computer sciences, physical and life sciences or management-related fields, according to the New York-based Institute of International Education, which administers international scholarship programs and places thousands of foreign students in U.S. schools. ``An important policy need is to encourage developing-country nationals to return home. Their U.S. education should represent a brain gain, not a drain,'' says Institute chairman Charles H. Percy, a former Illinois senator. Dissenting, Peter Sprague, chairman of the board of National Semiconductor Corp., notes that ``the American university system is unmatched in the world, and the United States is a mecca for foreign students. ``About half our science and engineering graduate students are foreigners. We should give them green cards,'' admitting them as immigrants, said Sprague at the Stevens forum. He said he spoke for the high technology industries of California's Silicon Valley. While U.S. universities may set a high standard, American primary and secondary education is often inadequate, said Pulitzer Prize-winning author David Halberstam at the Stevens forum. ``Technical universities like Stevens are at the cutting edge of economic development,'' he said, ``but the Japanese are killing us in ninth grade mathematics.'' 
A lone assassin rapidly fired five shots at point-blank range through the window of a small pizzeria, then vanished into the cold December night on a motorcycle. He left behind three people dead or dying, three wounded and his Belgian-made, 12-gauge sawed-off shotgun _ a trademark of an underworld killing. The next morning, at a gas station across town, a mob-linked contractor opened the door of his bulletproof car and died, along with his son-in-law, in bursts of submachine-gun and automatic rifle fire. The 'ndrangheta, the name for the Calabrian underworld, has made a killing field of the faded cities and towns in the rugged hills and along the jagged coast of Italy's impoverished southern tip. In the past year, 165 people have been murdered in the province of Reggio Calabria, at least 50 of them in this city across the Strait of Messina from Sicily. The death toll is staggering when compared to just 31 killings in the province of Rome, which has a population of about 3.7 million, more than six times greater than Reggio Calabria's 589,000. Investigators say most of the Calabrian dead fell victim to the struggle for control of the drug trade or to a 25-year-old blood feud between two powerful crime families. ``In certain zones of Sicily, Calabria and Campagna (Naples), the possession of the territory by organized crime is total,'' Domenico Sica, Italy's high anti-Mafia commissioner, recently told Parliament's Anti-Mafia Commission. The bosses of the 'ndrangheta, which means ``society of valorous men,'' rule their Calabrian territories through fear and intimidation. Their retribution is swift and lethal. Often, life in their domain is short and incredibly cheap. One Rome-based investigator, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the average price for a hired killing in Calabria is $400. Free-lance hit men sometimes kill for free, hoping to curry favor with a certain boss. Drugs are at the core of the criminal empire that links the 'ndrangheta with the Sicilian Mafia, Colombian cocaine kingpins and heroin warlords of Asia. Experts estimate Italian crime bosses earn $10 billion to $12 billion a year from the international heroin trade and that sales of cocaine and other drugs may push the total above $20 billion. The 'ndrangheta also profits from murders-for-hire, gunrunning, trading in counterfeit dollars, and kidnapping rings that collect huge ransoms for quick reinvestment in drug deals. Calabrian businesses must pay extortion to avoid the torch, and corrupt politicians swell `ndrangheta coffers with millions misdirected from public works contracts, government development funds and investment schemes designed to benefit Italy's blighted south. To reassert control, the government proposes expanding the powers of police investigating organized crime and drug trafficking. One measure would give police the authority to conduct undercover investigations _ forbidden in a postwar Italy that remembers abuses under the fascist dictatorship of Benito Mussolini. In Rome, U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration agents already are quietly training Italian authorities in undercover work. Interior Minister Antonio Gava also has promised better training for police, specialized departments, creation of mobile groups to help in trouble spots and new local commissioners to oversee the war on crime in Calabria. This encourages Lt. Col. Corrado Borruso, commander of the Carabinieri paramilitary police in Reggio Di Calabria, who are on the front line of the war with crime. Borruso said he believes the government can defeat the `ndrangheta, that it can use expanded powers and undercover operations to go after the leaders and stop the killing. ``It will be a struggle, really a long struggle,'' said Borruso. ``We must seek to stop this slaughter through the arrest of the big bosses who pull the strings of all the `ndrangheta operations.'' However, some other investigators question the political will of the government to do the things necessary to defeat organized crime. Billions of dollars in illicit profits bolster the clout of the Mafia and 'ndrangheta, and some politicians owe their careers to votes collected by the mob. Privately some investigators admit they can't penetrate the tightknit clans of the 'ndrangheta and don't know enough about its operation. For example, they know the Calabrians help smuggle tons of morphine base into Italy from southwest Asia, to refine it and to sell it in Europe and in the United States through contacts in Toronto. But they don't know the details of the partnership with the Sicilians, who really control the drug market, or how much the Calabrians share in the profits. Informers and hirelings willing to testify against their Calabrian bosses are extremely rare. ``He who is blind, deaf and dumb will live a hundred years,'' advises an Italian proverb on the code of silence called the ``Omerta'' or ``Diffidenza.'' The `ndrangheta has a long memory and a long reach. While Italy, laments the Rome-based investigator, has no effective witness protection program. The government's enemy is also formidable in its sheer size. Police say there are 156 'ndrangheta clans in Calabria, 93 of them in the province of Reggio Calabria. Police records list slightly over 4,000 members of the clans in Calabria. But investigators have said they believe that for everyone on the list there are at least two who have escaped identification. Police from all agencies in Calabria number about 3,600. But Borruso and other investigators bristle at suggestions that they need more manpower, apparently considering such recommendations a veiled slap at police effectiveness. ``It is not only a question or a problem for the police,'' said Borruso. The government, he said, must change the things in Calabria that permit the `ndrangheta to flourish. His sentiments are echoed by politicians, both nationally and locally, who believe Italy can never defeat the `ndrangheta in Calabria, the Camorra in Campagna or the Mafia in Sicily as long as the regions are allowed to languish in poverty. Calabria ranks at the bottom of the list of per capita income by region, with its citizens earning 44 percent less than the national average. Calabria's unemployment rate of 21.6 percent is nearly twice the 11.9 percent for Italy as a whole and two and a half times the rate for the country's affluent north. Calabria, like much of the rest of southern Italy, has not benefited significantly from the industrial boom and the economic resurrgence that Italy contends has given it the West's fifth-largest economy. Many of Calabria's factories sit idle. Its ports are largely empty. Much of its land is rocky, mountainous and untilled. ``In the absence of an adequate presence by the state, the 'ndrangheta has penetrated into the vital nerve centers of the economy, politics and public administration,'' Calabria's regional president, Rosario Olivio, said at a recent meeting with Sica, Gava and anti-Mafia investigators. ``The central problem is unemployment and around that turns everything else,'' said Olivio. 
Widely ignored and usually docile, South Africa's black homelands are producing a new generation of leaders frustrated with limited autonomy and demanding a bigger role in shaping the political future. The authoritarian tribal chiefs who have long ruled the 10 homelands are being replaced or challenged by younger men, who view their territories as key partners in a united South Africa rather than isolated tribal reservations. ``The youth see the homelands differently than their parents, and it is not attractive to them,'' said Gen. Bantu Holomisa, the 33-year-old military ruler of Transkei. Transkei in 1976 was the first homeland to become independent from South Africa. ``We have been given a raw deal (by South Africa), and we won't settle for that again,'' Holomisa said in a recent interview in Umtata, Transkei's capital. No foreign governments recognize the homelands, including the four that South Africa classifies as independent _ Transkei, Bophuthatswana, Venda and Ciskei. Anti-apartheid activists dismiss the homelands as the illegitimate offspring of apartheid, which denies South Africa's black majority a voice in national affairs. The homelands have little industry, scarce arable land and are heavily dependent on South African financial aid. They are largely ignored both in South Africa and abroad, although they have more than 13 million residents _ about half South Africa's black population. Holomisa and other like-minded homeland leaders concede they lack leverage when they ask the South African government for a role in negotiating political change. But their goal of a unified South Africa directly challenges the foundation of the ethnic-based homeland system designed by Hendrik Verwoerd, South Africa's prime minister from 1958 to 1966. Verwoerd sought to make all black South Africans citizens of the remote homelands, granting them local autonomy while whites controlled the national economy and government. A conservative, older generation of tribal chiefs accepted self-government in the 1960s and 1970s, receiving financial benefits and the support of South African security forces. In return, the chiefs have neither instigated nor tolerated anti-apartheid activism. However, younger leaders see the territories only as an interim step on the road to a black government in South Africa. ``In our own territory, we have tried to ... promote our own agenda and unequivocally to destroy the (apartheid) structure,'' Enos Mabuza, the 49-year-old leader of the KaNgwane homeland, recently told the magazine Leadership. ``Our objective is that (KaNgwane) should be part of South Africa, if not now, then in the long term,'' he said. Mabuza has risked the wrath of the South African government by maintaining contacts with leaders of the outlawed African National Congress guerrilla movement, the largest organization fighting the government. He describes the ANC as ``a key actor, perhaps the most important actor'' among black political organizations. He also has refused ``independence'' for tiny KaNgwane, near South Africa's eastern border with Mozambique. The South African government would like all 10 homelands to become independent as part of its policy of racial separation. Critics say the government wants to fragment the black population and decrease its political clout. Only four homelands have opted for independence, and none has chosen that route since Ciskei in 1981. Several developments in the past year suggest growing anti-apartheid activism in the homelands and a general discontent with the system. _In KwaNdebele, voters in December overwhelmingly ousted all 16 Parliament members up for election, including Chief Minister George Mahlangu. The defeated incumbents supported independence plans for the small patch of arid territory outside Pretoria that is home to about 300,000 people. _In Bophuthatswana, dissident army officers launched a coup attempt Feb. 10 against President Lucas Mangope, who has led the homeland since it was declared independent in 1977. The group that kidnapped Mangope was led by an anti-independence politician, Peter Metsing, who remains at large. South African troops rescued Mangope and restored him to power hours after he was captured. _In Venda, a nominally independent homeland in the far north, students and workers staged a highly effective general strike in August to protest an alleged government cover-up of ritual murders. _In KwaZulu, homeland leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi's Inkatha political organization is locked in a power struggle with the now banned United Democratic Front, a nationwide coalition of anti-apartheid groups. More than 1,000 have died in black-on-black faction fighting around the cities of Pietermaritzburg and Durban in the past two years. Buthelezi, the best known homeland leader, is a critic of apartheid and was an ANC member years ago. But many activists view him as too conservative due to his current condemnation of the ANC and his refusal to support confrontational tactics such as economic sanctions, consumer boycotts and strikes. In Transkei, Holomisa says he does not pursue contact with the ANC because it would invite economic punishment from the South African government. Nonetheless, he says ``there will never be genuine change without the ANC'' and other major anti-apartheid groups. Holomisa stresses that many of Transkei's most pressing problems are economic, not political. Located on the Indian Ocean coast, Transkei is a visually spectacular collection of rolling hills, winding rivers, and waterfalls. But 95 percent of the people live in impoverished rural settlements, and 80 percent are illiterate. Infant mortality is high, and life expectancy is low. Most men who have jobs work outside the homeland and either have long daily commutes or are far from their families most of the year. Because Transkei is not recognized internationally, it receives no economic aid except from South Africa. ``South Africa's racial policies have hurt us,'' said Holomisa. ``But international sanctions also make us suffer. There are human problems here that can't be wished away by pretending we don't exist.'' 
As Ronald Reagan steps from the stage, he leaves a world remarkably different from the one he inherited eight years ago. During Reagan's watch, Soviet-American relations took on a warmth that could not have been anticipated then. Much of Latin America shed its dictators and embraced democracy. The United Nations gained in importance. The U.S. government opened talks with the Palestine Liberation Organization, which the Reagan administration had labeled an outlaw band of terrorists. And the administration sold arms to another adversary _ the regime of the ayatollah in Iran. Associated Press reporters who have covered these events sum up the Reagan impact on world affairs: 
WASHINGTON _ Reagan rewrote the book on dealing with the Kremlin. But if the book has changed, so has Moscow and so has Reagan. At the outset, Reagan labelled the Soviet Union an ``evil empire'' whose leaders asserted for themselves the ``right to commit any crime, to lie, to cheat, to attain their goal.'' ``So far, detente has been a one-way street that the Soviet Union has used to pursue its own aims,'' Reagan said on Jan. 29, 1981. He backed his rhetoric with a trillion dollar defense buildup. The Soviets cranked up their propaganda machine in response, equating the Reagan administration with Hitler's Third Reich. After the Soviets walked out of talks to limit intermediate-range missiles, Reagan pulled his biggest surprise, in March 1983 directing U.S. scientists to devise a shield against intercontinental ballistic missiles. The Strategic Defense Initiative reversed an 11-year-old policy and has dominated the arms control debate since then. It is widely credited with driving the Soviets back to the bargaining table. At the same time, one generation was giving way to another in the Kremlin. Leonid Brezhnev, who was Soviet leader when Reagan took office and under whom the Soviets invaded Afghanistan in December 1979 and countenanced the military crackdown against Poland's Solidarity labor union two years later, died in November 1982. He was followed in quick succession by two elderly men, Yuri Andropov and Konstantin Chernenko, who died in office and gave way to Mikhail S. Gorbachev in March 1985. Reagan and Gorbachev found they could do business. In December 1987, they signed a treaty that for the first time eliminated a whole class of new nuclear weapons and created a highly intrusive system of on-site verification. The two sides also have made progress on a treaty to sharply reduce long-range weapons, although differences remain, especially over Star Wars. The changes have been profound enough for Reagan to declare at a news conference concluding the Moscow summit last summer that he had ``great confidence'' in Gorbachev's ability to change the Soviet Union. _By Bryan Brumley 
WASHINGTON _ Israel considered Reagan its best friend in the White House since President Harry S. Truman supported establishment of the Jewish state 40 years ago. But in his last weeks, Reagan and Secretary of State George P. Shultz authorized talks with the PLO. It was a shocking turn of events bound to open a new chapter in the Mideast's history. The decision, based on statements made by PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat renouncing terrorism and saying a Palestinian state would live alongside Israel, dismayed Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir and was denounced by the Jerusalem government. Still, the criticism was muted, while American Jewish leaders also held their fire. This was largely due to the trust Reagan and Shultz had built up. Peace plans advanced _ unsuccessfully _ by Reagan and Shultz did not provide for an independent Palestinian state nor call on Israel to relinquish all of the West Bank and Gaza. U.S. criticism of the spread of Jewish outposts in the territories was muted and a U.N. resolution condemning them as illegal and an obstruction to peace was vetoed by the United States. The strenuous American campaign against terrorism led by Shultz cemented ties with Israel, a target of extremists. American jets bombed Tripoli, the capital of Libya, and Shultz denied a visa to Arafat to speak at the United Nations in New York. Ironically, only a few weeks later, Shultz approved a ``substantive dialogue'' with the PLO, which enhanced Arafat's prestige and was received with jubilation in the Arab world. In another curious twist, the Untied States and Israel secretly provided arms to Iran despite Iran's presence on the State Department's list of countries that support terrorism. The purpose was to encourage moderation in Tehran and to secure the release of American hostages. Nine remain in captivity as Reagan leaves office. In 1982, when Israeli troops and tanks rolled into Lebanon in a campaign to wipe out the PLO, the Reagan administration organized a diplomatic effort to stop the invasion short of Beirut and dispatched U.S. Marines to protect the PLO as it evacuated the country. Lebanese Christians massacred Palestinians that September in refugee camps south of Beirut, bringing U.S. Marines back to lower tensions. This mission ended in disaster. Terrorists blew up the U.S. embassy in April 1983 and bombed the Marines' headquarters in October, killing 241 servicemen. In 1983, Shultz worked out an agreement for Israel to withdraw its troops while Lebanon moved toward recognition of the Jewish state. Syria and Saudi Arabia persuaded Lebanon to abandon the accord. In the meantime, Reagan's plan for peace talks between Israel and the Arabs did not get off the ground when it was rejected by Menachem Begin, then Israel's prime minister, in 1982. Shultz tried a similar version of ``land-for-peace'' in 1988, but it was not accepted by Israel, Jordan and Palestinians. A tougher test of the U.S.-Iraelirelationship began with rising violence by Palestinian Arabs on the West Bank and in Gaza a year ago and the establishment of a U.S. dialogue with the PLO _ a matter now put in George Bush's hands. _By Barry Schweid 
UNITED NATIONS _ It wasn't Ronald Reagan's doing, but the United Nations began to play an important role in world affairs. Its peacekeeping forces won the Nobel Peace Prize and some member states even started paying back dues. Reagan had been critical of the world organization for seven years, but in October, addressing the 159 nations of the General Assembly for the last time, he conceded: ``Yes, the United Nations is a better place today. But so, too, is the world.'' The United Nations has played or is playing a major role in molding peace agreements, peace talks or peace prospects in Afghanistan, the Iran-Iraq war, Southern Africa and Namibia, Cambodia and the Western Sahara. The United States, the biggest U.N. donor, feels it has prodded the world body into cutting costs. Washington saw an anti-American bias, overspending, overstaffing, bureaucracy and waste and complained that poor, developing nations hostile to the West contributed little but dictated how U.S. funds would be spent of squandered. 
Most recently the United States was on a collision course with the world body over its refusal to grant a visa to Arafat so that he could speak here. The enraged General Assembly rebuked Washington and traveled to Geneva in protest to hear him. But even that dispute was set aside when the United States accepted what Arafat said as a renunciation of terror and opened talks with the PLO. _By Victoria Graham 
WASHINGTON _ Reagan took office determined to reverse pro-Soviet sentiment in Central America. He leaves with those hopes unfulfilled. Nicaragua's leftist government appears firmly entrenched as the thousands of Contra rebels on whom Reagan invested much political capital find themselves in dreary camps along the Honduran-Nicaraguan border, cut off from U.S. military support. Reagan once told a press conference that his goal in Nicaragua was to see the Sandinistas ``say uncle.'' In El Salvador, there is more uncertainty than at any time since 1984 when a democratically-elected president, Jose Napoleon Duarte, took office. That event was a victory for administration perseverance but Duarte's term is ending with a guerrilla war still raging and living standards far below what they were a decade ago despite hundreds of millions of dollars of U.S. aid. The country's political life is marked by increasing polarization. Military governments in Guatemala and Honduras have given way to elected governments but in both countries full blown democracy has yet to take root. Nicaragua ranks as a major Reagan disappointment. In every other regional conflict _ Afghanistan, Angola and Cambodia _ the administration can claim a measure of success. Reagan was never able to sell the notion to the American people that the Sandinista government was a menace which, left unchecked, would result in the spread of Marxism throughout Central America and into Mexico. He could never rally a sustainable consensus in support of his view that the best way to deal with the Sandinistas was through generous support for the Contra rebels, who Reagan once called the ``moral equivalent of the founding fathers.'' Within the Reagan White House the Contra cause became a highly emotional issue. It induced some of the administration's most strategically placed people _ National Security advisor John Poindexter and Lt. Col. Oliver North _ to bend or perhaps break the law because defeat of the Contras seemed so unthinkable. Both were charged with breaking the law. _By George Gedda 
WASHINGTON _ Reagan leaves office with a mixed record on arms control. The treaty he signed at the Washington summit with Gorbachev in December 1987 was a landmark. For the first time in history, an entire category of U.S. and Soviet missiles _ those in the intermediate range of 300 to 3,000 miles _ was abolished. The treaty also broke new ground in providing for Soviet inspectors to observe the destruction of banned U..S. missiles here, while American monitors checked up on the Soviets at their sites. Left undone, however, was the larger Reagan goal of completing a treaty to reduce globe-girdling nuclear missiles, bombers and submarines by 30 to 50 percent. Some of the weapons ticketed for cutbacks, such as sea-launched cruise missiles, are extremely difficult to detect. Negotiations stalled over verification procedures, while the Soviets never abandoned their attempt to impose some sort of restrictions on the U.S. anti-ballistic missile program as part of a Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty. The program, known formally as the Strategic Defense Initiative, is aimed at mounting a defense in space against Soviet ballistic missiles. In other arms control areas, Reagan did not reach an agreement with the Soviets on ways to monitor underground nuclear tests nor find a way to deter the proliferation of chemical weapons. He accused the Soviets in reports to Congress of probably exceeding the permissible 150-kiloton ceiling on underground blasts. _By Barry Schweid 
WASHINGTON _ The prime minister of Japan made his get-acquainted call less than four months into President Reagan's first term. Questioned about defense policy by members of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki said Japan felt it ``Better to be a porcupine than a roaring lion.'' But the official interpreter got it wrong and ``porcupine'' came out in English as ``wise mouse.'' The Japanese embassy corrected the animal mixup but the incident still triggered a burst of comment that Japan was shirking responsibility and enjoying a ``free ride'' on defense at the cost of the United States. To some Americans _ those displaced from jobs by imports _ Japan may look today like a lion-sized economic porcupine. But experts rate overall relations better today than at the beginning of the Reagan years. Quality- and price-conscious U.S. consumers continue to buy up Japanese products. Lack of American competitiveness has become recognized as part of the problem of U.S. trade deficits that rose from $16 billion with Japan in 1981 to nearly $70 billion before they started to decline last year. Eight years and two prime ministers after Suzuki visited Washington, the Japanese continue to shun a ``roaring lion'' military role and there is greater acceptance of this at the Pentagon and White House. The Reagan administration hails as a success the defense relationship in which Japan now helps pay the upkeep of nearly 55,000 U.S. personnel on its territory and provides destroyers, anti-submarine patrols and jet fighters to defend sealanes up to 1,000 nautical miles off its shores. It also applauds Japan's offsetting of its constitutionally-mandated low military profile by becoming the world's largest foreign aid donor with a five-year, $50 billion program of assistance tied less and less to buying Japanese products. Experts give Reagan and his administration good marks for recognizing Japan's growing status as an economic superpower vital to the United States and encouraging the relationship to mature into a partnership stressing dialogue and shared benefits more than name-calling. _By Gene Kramer 
LONDON _ The Reagan years brought a specialness to the British-American relationship not seen since World War II, and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher made it the cornerstone of her foreign policy. For Reagan, Mrs. Thatcher has stood alone among the other West European leaders, even at political cost. For example, she was the sole ally to back the 1986 U.S. bombing raid on Libya, which most others in Britain denounced as heavy-handed and futile. Under Mrs. Thatcher, Britain followed the United States out of UNESCO in 1985; was the first to deploy U.S. cruise missiles in Europe in 1983; and, when the superpowers agreed in 1987 to remove the missiles, she publicly endorsed the deal despite private reservations. 
Mrs. Thatcher was given to bluntly reminding her fellow Europeans in NATO or the European Economic Community of their reliance on U.S. military and diplomatic power. This has revived complaints that the British cling to old trans-Atlantic ties and are unenthusiastic Europeans. Reagan's style provoked amusement, concern or jibing among British opposition parties and in newspapers. But not even in strict confidence would Thatcher aides utter a word of criticism of the president. Reagan and Thatcher have disagreed on economic issues like the U.S. deficit, and she had misgivings about the missiles deal. But they're obviously fond of each other, call each other Ron and Margaret, and share some basic instincts, like their faith in the free market and a strong defense, and their hatred of socialism. ``You have restored faith in the American dream,'' Mrs. Thatcher told Reagan last summer when he paid a farewell presidential visit to Britain. He said of the British leader who has been in office throughout his two terms: ``We're very good friends and it is a friendship I treasure very much.'' 
WASHINGTON _ The Reagan administration looked as if it was going to come up empty on its southern Africa policies until Chester Crocker, the assistant secretary of state, pulled out an 11th hour peace agreement on Angola. Until Crocker, a former Georgetown University professor, helped negotiate the peace agreement last month, he was best known as the architect of the administration's policy of ``constructive engagement.'' It called for the United States to use diplomatic pressure to force the white-ruled government of South Africa to change its policies of racial segregation, called apartheid.. ``Constructive engagement,'' no longer part of the State Department's official lexicon, was not a success. South Africa's policies remain virtually the same, with blacks denied political and social rights. In the United States, ``constructive engagement'' was the target of criticism and ridicule. And opponents of South Africa mounted a campaign which resulted in legislation in 1986 providing for economic sanctions against the white regime. They provided for a ban on new investments, a prohibition on the import of certain South African products and the suspension of South African commercial landing rights in the United States. Reagan's veto of the sanctions was overridden decisively. In Angola, where the Reagan administration and South Africa had supported rebels seeking to overthrow the Cuban-backed Marxist government, Crocker was more successful. After months of mediating delicate negotiations, South Africa, Cuba and Angola signed an agreement under which Angola pledged to send home 50,000 Cuban troops posted in Angola. At the same time, South Africa granted independence to South-West Africa, the continent's last colony. It will become the black-ruled nation of Namibia. In sum, it was a mixed record for the Reagan administration. _By Joan Mower 
WASHINGTON _ With U.S. encouragement, much of Latin America has undergone an unprecedented political transformation from dictatorship to democracy over the past decade but the region is nonetheless worse off economically now than when the generals were in charge. Reagan and Shultz have repeatedly hailed the democratic development in the hemisphere. Nonetheless, the same economic forces that swept the dictatorships from power during the 1980's are now threatening the emerging democracies. In some countries, the possibility of a military coup is not ruled out. As Reagan leaves office, the potential political and economic consequences of continued stagnation, partly the result of the region's huge foreign debt, could become one of the major hemispheric challenges for the new administration. President-elect Bush has called for a ``major review'' of existing policy on debt, the centerpiece of which is the so-called Baker plan, named for former Treasury Secretary and Secretary of State-designate James A. Baker III. The plan calls for economic reforms in the debtor countries and new public and private lending from the developed countries to meet their capital needs. But lending has been far below what had been expected when the plan was unveiled three years ago. Hemispheric countries over the past five years have shelled out more than $120 billion in debt repayments than they have received in new loans. Repayments on the region's $420 billion debt have meant that decades of hard-won gains for some countries have been wiped out. The region has been denied capital needed for investment and imports vital for production have been cut back sharply. Inflation and high unemployment are rampant. The list of countries which have made the shift to democracy or are in the process of doing so since 1979 is impressive: Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Chile, Ecuador, Peru, Uruguay, El Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala. But in virtually all of these countries, the popular base of the incumbent administrations has been eroding, reflecting the difficulty they have in dealing with the consequences of excessive borrowing in the past. Increasingly, Latin leaders see debt relief as perhaps the only way their countries can restore economic growth and to prevent yet another lost decade. _By George Gedda 
WASHINGTON _ Reagan's departure coincides with the start of a six-year term by a new Mexican president, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, offer both countries a fresh opportunity for a more harmonious relationship. Reagan met frequently with former Mexican President Miguel de la Madrid and the two got along well but the same cannot be said for officials at the lower level. The two governments disagreed sharply over Central America, particularly Nicaragua, where Mexico was viewed by administration officials as perhaps the most stalwart non-communist backer of the leftist Sandinista government. Elliott Abrams, the outgoing assistant secretary of state for Latin America, concedes that the ``ideological tone'' of Mexico's foreign policy over the years left the administration ``very unhappy.'' U.S. officials angered Mexico by suggesting that official corruption was hampering that country's drug enforcement efforts. Mexico felt the Reagan administration failed to appreciate the sacrifices its security forces made to come to grips with the drug issue. Drugs remain a potent issue. Mexico is believed to provide 30 percent of the marijuana and 40 percent of the heroin reaching this country. Immigration is another divisive issue. The Reagan administration maintained that unwise Mexican economic policies forced millions of Mexicans to cross the border illegally. Mexico's view is that the immigration is the result of the U.S. demand for cheap labor, which it claims American policies fail to take into account. On the economic front, Mexico has maintained that paying the interest on its $107 billion foreign debt makes growth impossible. When Bush takes office, Mexico will be eagerly awaiting some sign that he will be amenable to a policy under which Mexico's debt servicing obligations might be matched to its payment capacity. Mexico has felt for years that its debt is the primary cause for a steady decline in Mexican living standards during the 1980s. _By George Gedda 
With the same visions of stardom that carried scores of farm girls to this town in years past, foreign investors today are migrating to Hollywood to make it big in the entertainment industry. Japan's Sony Corp. has been trying to purchase film studio MGM for months without success. British broadcaster Television South PLC acquired television producer MTM Enterprises for $310 million in July. Australian businessman Alan Saffron bought film producer Atlantic Entertainment Group on Dec. 13. And numerous other overseas buyers, flush with cash and bolstered by strong currencies, have their checkbooks unholstered, waiting for the right moment to join Southern California's movers and shakers. ``I predict that over the next three to five years, you're going to have two or three major studios change hands,'' said Steve Rosenberg, president of entertainment consulting firm Rose Media. ``I truly believe that the Japanese will at least own one of them, and maybe the Germans will own another.'' ``You get the glamor and glitter to some extent but there are also investment characteristics,'' said Nancy Schwalb, whose Star Partners arranges limited participation in films such as ``A Fish Called Wanda.'' Investors from Australia, Japan, France and Canada, Schwalb said, ``are interested in the industry because it's so strong and they appreciate the growth.'' Even though the film industry is enjoying record profits, several large and small film studios are desperately in need of money. ``There are a lot of companies in serious trouble or potentially serious trouble,'' said Charles Meeker, head of the entertainment division at law firm White &amp; Case. Coca-Cola's Columbia Pictures, for one, has floundered recently and is rumored to be for sale. MGM sits dead in the water. Atlantic Entertainment, just purchased by Saffron's KVC Video for an undisclosed sum, was left destitute by box-office busts like ``Patty Hearst'' and ``1969.'' Yet the continuing deregulation of European television and the boom in overseas VCR sales (60 percent of Japanese homes have VCRs) have created a nearly insatiable demand for U.S. programming. American television shows and movies _ even domestic bombs like ``Airwolf'' and ``Rambo III'' _ have a remarkable ability to draw audiences in most foreign countries. ``There's a major change in the regulatory environment in Europe and there's an excess of Japanese capital looking for a home,'' said Harold Vogel, an entertainment industry analyst at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets. ``The combination of those two things means that (foreign money) will move toward the domestic film business.'' Entertainment-industry investments give electronic manufacturers an unbeatable opportunity to create full-service companies. Sony's recent $2 billion purchase of CBS Records, for instance, yielded a firm with both hardware (record, tape and CD players) and software (the Epic, Columbia and Portrait record labels). ``We're looking at Hollywood because of our interest in video, precisely the same reason we looked at CBS Records because of our interest in audio,'' said Michael Schuloff, Sony's vice chairman. Following Sony's model, Japan entertainment conglomerate Tokuma Group has opened a Los Angeles office, scouring the city for related investment opportunities. ``Mainly we are now looking for video rights ... for movies to show in Japan,'' said Hiro Iijima, general manager of Tokuma's North American operations. ``In the future, we would like to get theatrical (motion picture), television and home video rights.'' The easiest way to do that, of course, is to buy a studio already owning such rights. The foreign equation can work both ways. A few leading programmers _ Disney, NBC _ have begun spreading their franchises overseas. So far, though, the advances have been tentative. ``But I think you're going to see the successful U.S. studios make major moves into foreign markets,'' Meeker said. Yet blindly snapping up an entertainment company is as perilous as attending a Jerry Lewis film festival. Sony Pictures, a tiny movie company now disguised as SVS Films, has yet to become a successful producer. Sony removed its name from the enterprise when its releases (including a low-budget slasher film called ``Party Line'') threatened to tarnish Sony's golden corporate image. SVS' latest theatrical release, an exploitation film called ``Vicious,'' will not establish Sony as a high-brow producer. The movie, playing in just a handful of theaters, is described by the entertainment newspaper Variety as ``ludicrous,'' a ``violent cheapie'' featuring a ``vulgar screenplay.'' ``(Entertainment) is clearly more risky (than other loan investments), but that's not to say that it's necessarily outrageous,'' said William Newby, assistant vice president in the entertainment industry department at National Westminster Bank USA. ``You can't always apply typical accounting standards to the entertainment industry,'' Newby said. ``If a bank or any investor does their homework, I think there are values to be found certainly.... ``But it seems to be an industry where an awful lot of folks don't know what they're getting into.'' 
TORONTO _ Canada and the United States head for a new era of trade cooperation as Reagan leaves office. The free trade agreement that he signed with Prime Minister Brian Mulroney a year ago won approval only after an intensive debate in Canada that showed just how wary many here are of their larger and more powerful neighbor. The impact of the agreement, which took effect on Jan. 1, will be gradual over a 10-year period. But the debate also put the spotlight on the remarkable ties that have developed between Canada and the United States already and their two-way trading partnership, the largest such relationship in the world. Canada's prosperity and economic growth have paralleled and frequently exceeded the United States' during the past six years. As in the United States, concern also has been voiced here that affluence has gone only to some parts of society and instead of trickling down has created a harsh, uncaring class system. Reagan and Mulroney shared not only a conservative outlook but an Irish heritage that improved relations between Washington and Ottawa, sometimes at odds before 1984 under Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau. The biggest lingering source of friction between the two countries is the inability to achieve agreement on acid rain, despite Mulroney's claims to easy access with Reagan. The Canadian leader has said he hopes to do better on the issue with Bush. Mulroney seeks a treaty under which the U.S. government would promise to order reductions in sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions under a fixed schedule, just as Canada is cutting its emissions by 50 percent. _By Soll Sussman 
Pepsico Inc.'s $1.5 billion purchase of General Cinema Corp.'s soft-drink bottling business has fallen through, delayed beyond a 1988 deadline for completion by a government request for antitrust information about the proposed deal, the companies said. One of the most expensive bottling transactions ever proposed disintegrated last week when the Federal Trade Commission asked for additional details to determine whether it might violate antitrust laws, the companies said Tuesday. 
A federal judge ruled that Toyota Motor Corp. may not use the Lexus name for its latest entry in the U.S. market. It was disclosed Tuesday that U.S. District Judge David N. Edelstein in New York had ruled last week in a lawsuit filed against the Japanese carmaker by Mead Data Central Inc., which sells a data-base service to the legal profession under the name Lexis. Edelstein found Friday that the advertising barrage Toyota plans for its Lexus line ``will dwarf the Lexis mark'' _ despite the difference in spelling. 
European officials have put finishing touches on a proposal to strike back at the United States in a trade dispute incited by a ban on American meat treated with growth hormones. Nico Wegter, a spokesman for the European Economic Community, said Tuesday that he expected representatives of the 12-nation trading bloc would soon be given a proposal for imposing higher duties on certain U.S. products. The plan would counter measures the United States put into effect Sunday to retaliate against the European meat ban. 
British Petroleum Co. PLC has agreed to sell most of its mineral operations for $4.32 billion and, in a separate transaction, pay $3.57 billion to buy back more than half the 1.32 billion BP shares held by the government of Kuwait. RTZ Corp. PLC, a mining company with global interests, said Tuesday it agreed to buy the mineral operations, which includes operations in the United States, Mexico, Brazil, Norway, Zimbabwe, South Africa, Australia, Papua New Guinea and Indonesia, for 2.4 billion pounds, or $4.32 billion. 
Construction spending rose 0.8 percent in November, reflecting an increase in work on homes and government projects that more than offset slower building of offices and shopping malls, the Commerce Department reported. November's seasonally adjusted construction spending _ at an annual rate of $411.1 billion _ marked the third consecutive monthly increase. Revised figures also released Tuesday put spending at $407.8 billion in October, $406.9 billion in September and $403.2 billion in August. 
The world's largest bank, Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank Ltd., said it is selling its Chicago retail operations to First American Bank Corp., a suburban bank holding company, so it can focus entirely on business banking. Terms of the transaction, which involves Dai-Ichi's only U.S. retail and consumer banking operations, were not disclosed. The deal includes assets of $35 million, including about 6,000 checking, savings and other accounts, and a retail loan portfolio, the companies said in a joint statement Tuesday. 
Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Co. would not confirm or deny reports that it has been studying MCorp's books in a possible bid to buy Texas' second-largest bank holding company, but one source says the presence of the leveraged buyout firm is no secret. ``I've talked to people from within the bank that substantiate that they're doing due diligence,'' Frank Anderson, an analyst for Stephens &amp; Co., said Tuesday. ``They're looking over the books. We were all surprised when we found out KKR is involved.'' 
President Reagan said he has decided against any oil import fee or other action to curb oil imports but conceded that ``the free world will become increasingly dependent on oil supplies from potentially insecure sources.'' The president said Tuesday that he acted on the recommendation of Commerce Secretary C. William Verity, who reported that import restrictions ``would not be cost effective and, in the long run, would impair rather than enhance national security.'' 
The newspaper Izvestia, which for decades thundered against capitalists in columns of small, gray type, has splashed on some green and opened its pages for the first time to foreign advertisers. Two pages of ads from European and U.S. companies were the first in a weekly effort ``to give Western businessmen the possibility to enter into direct dialogue with future Soviet partners who are trying to set up contacts with the foreign market,'' the government newspaper said Tuesday in a front-page announcement. 
CBS Records has agreed to buy Tree International Publishing, the world's largest country music publisher. New York-based CBS Records, the world's largest record company and a subsidiary of Japan's Sony Corp., is buying Tree for a reported $45 million to $50 million. 
The Ambassador Hotel, where Charlie Chaplin lived, Robert F. Kennedy died, Marion Davies rode a horse through the lobby and generations of stars entertained at the Cocoanut Grove lounge, has closed its doors. The last guests bid farewell Tuesday to the 68-year-old Wilshire Boulevard landmark. In May, the owners, the J. Myer Schine family, closed about three-quarters of the 500 rooms because they failed to meet fire standards, and more than $1 million was needed for earthquake-safety improvements. 
Wall Street opened for business in 1989 with a markdown Tuesday, as the Dow Jones average of 30 industrials fell 23.93 points to 2,144.64. The dollar skidded largely because of pessimism about the U.S. trade deficit. Bond prices fell sharply in a post-New Year's selloff incited by weakness in the dollar and forecasts of higher interest rates. On the commodities markets, coffee and cocoa futures prices rose sharply while prices for cotton, sugar and orange juice futures plunged; energy futures advanced; precious metals, grain, soybean, livestock and meat futures were mixed; and stock-index futures retreated. 
There is no Economy Rdp planned for this cycle. 
Toyota Motor Corp. says it will go ahead with the introduction of a new line of luxury cars despite a judge's ruling that the models' name must be changed. U.S. District Judge David N. Edelstein in New York ruled that Toyota may not use the Lexus name for the cars because it will damage the trademark of a similarly named computer data-base service. The ruling came in a lawsuit filed against the Japanese carmaker by Mead Data Central Inc., which sells a data-base service to the legal profession under the name Lexis. Edelstein found Friday that the advertising barrage Toyota plans for its Lexus line ``will dwarf the Lexis mark'' _ despite the difference in spelling. He said that when people hear the name, the car rather than the computer product might come to mind first. Edelstein added that Toyota ``consistently refused to acknowledge that its use of Lexus might harm Mead's Lexis mark.'' But the judge, noting that Toyota had already spent enormous sums on Lexus, gave Toyota five days to accept an alternate order that would permit it to use the name provided it meet certain conditions. Among them are making payments to Mead to enable the company to preserve the distinctiveness of its Lexis trademark through increased advertising, and running a disclaimer in all Lexus advertising stating that the car line is not connected with Mead's product. The amount of compensation to Mead for extra advertising would be subject to negotiation between Mead and Toyota. On Monday, Toyota obtained a temporary stay of Edelstein's injunction. On Thursday, a panel of the 2nd U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals is expected to hear arguments on whether the stay should be extended, said Mead, which is based in Dayton, Ohio. If the stay is not extended, Toyota will be prohibited from using the Lexus name when exhibiting its new car line at automobile shows that open Saturday in Detroit and Los Angeles, Mead said. But Jim Olson, spokesman for Toyota Motor Sales U.S.A Inc., said Tuesday that the official launch of the car line, scheduled for Thursday in Detroit, would go ahead as planned because of the stay. The U.S. affiliate, based in Torrance, Calif., also was named in the suit. Olson said he could not comment on whether Toyota would accept the alternate order, which was proposed by Mead, because the matter was under appeal. ``We were shocked by the lower court's decision, which we consider wrong and utterly without basis in fact or law,'' said Bob McCurry, executive vice president of Toyota Motor Sales. Edelstein's ruling came under a New York law that entitles a trademark owner to relief if it can demonstrate that its trademark is likely to be diluted by another company's use of the same or similar name. Arthur Greenbaum, a New York trademark attorney, said the proposed advertising disclaimers have been used in similar cases, but called ``unusual and creative'' the proposal that Toyota pay Mead to increase its Lexis advertising. Toyota said it planned to have the Japanese cars in U.S. showrooms in mid-September. The Lexus line represents a move to the high end of the car market for Toyota, which established its reputation as a maker of high-quality, moderately priced vehicles. Toyota said the two-model Lexus line, costing $20,000 to $35,000, will compete with Mercedes-Benz and BMW, a segment of the market being targeted by other Japanese carmakers. Lexis, the data-retrieval service, provides information on court decisions, as well as access to many other data bases. It is used by law firms as well as by those in many other fields. Mead Data Central is a subsidiary of Mead Corp., which also has operations in forest products. 
One of the most expensive bottling transactions ever proposed, Pepsico's $1.5 billion plan to buy General Cinema Corp.'s soft drink bottling business, has collapsed following a government request for more information that delayed the deal. The deal disintegrated Friday when the Federal Trade Commission asked for additional details to determine whether it might violate antitrust laws, the companies said Tuesday. Under the agreement signed by General Cinema and Pepsico on Nov. 30, the deal was contingent on a 1988 closure for tax reasons. Had the deal succeeded, it would have brought one of the nation's biggest independent bottlers under Pepsi's control, allowing the soft drink giant to consolidate bottling operations and reduce costs, industry analysts said. The deal would have allowed General Cinema to take advantage of a provision in the federal tax law allowing them to defer $400 million in capital gains taxes over 20 years. That provision expired Dec. 31. General Cinema and Pepsico officials said Tuesday that they have been already conferring about a new deal. But the announcement that the original transaction collapsed evidently helped depress General Cinema's stock, which fell $1.50 a share to $24 on the New York Stock Exchange. Pepsico was unchanged at $39.50 a share. ``The question is, how much is it worth to them (Pepsico) and can they continue to negotiate,'' said Lawrence Adelman, an analyst with Dean, Witter Reynolds. ``But Pepsi feels it has a strategic fit there and General Cinema has strategic problems of its own.'' Jim Griffith, a spokesman for Pepsico, said it was not fair to compare any deal made in 1988 with one that may be negotiated this year. Griffith termed the FTC's action a ``disappointment.'' Peter Farwell, vice-president of General Cinema, said the FTC's move was unexpected. ``The deal as it stood in 1988 is off,'' he said. ``The cost to Pepsico or the compensation to General Cinema will be decidedly different because Uncle Sam will have his hand in the till for more money,'' said Roy D. Burry, a senior vice-president at the Wall Street brokerage house of Kidder, Peabody Inc. ``If a new deal is done, the parties will have to take a lot less or pay a lot more.'' General Cinema, a film exhibition and soft-drink bottling concern based in Chestnut Hill, Mass., owns and operates 1,359 movie screens at 318 locations throughout the United States. Earnings from the movie operations declined about 5 percent despite a slight rise in box office revenues in the fiscal year ended Oct. 31. General Cinema also owns about 60 percent of the Neiman Marcus Group, which consists of Neiman Marcus, Bergdorf Goodman and Contempo Casuals stores. It has announced plans to open 10 to 12 new Neiman Marcus stores by 1995. General Cinema also owns about 18 percent of the stock in Cadbury Schweppes PLC since 1986, company officials said. General Cinema entered the bottling business in 1968 when it acquired American Beverage Corp., which held Pepsi franchises in Miami and northern Ohio. It subsequently purchased other franchises and now has regional bottling facilities in Atlanta; Jacksonville, Fla.; Winston-Salem, N.C.; Twinsburg, Ohio and Charleston, W.Va. The company's beverage unit had revenue of about $720 million for the fiscal year that ended Oct. 31. Pepsico, headquartered in Purchase, N.Y., is one of the largest soft drink and snack-foods producers, with revenues of more than $11.5 billion in 1987. 
Japanese companies are likely to beat their American rivals to the market with products that use new high-temperature superconductors unless the United States puts better organization and more money into long-range development, a White House advisory panel says. Important profit-making uses for superconductivity are at least a decade away, but the United States cannot afford to leave them to chance, the panel said in its report to President Reagan on Tuesday. The panel urged the creation of four to six superconductivity consortiums scattered around the country that would unite university, government and industry laboratories that are working on superconductivity. The consortiums would cost the federal government about $25 million to $30 million a year, on top of the roughly $90 million the government already spends on superconductivity research, the panel said. In addition, the panel recommended an increase of ``a few million dollars'' a year in grants to universities for basic research. Superconductors can conduct electricity without any loss of energy from resistance when they are kept extremely cold, raising the possibility of more efficient engines and motors, faster computer chips and improved scientific devices such as particle accelerators and magnetic fusion machines. Newly discovered materials are superconductive with less refrigeration, which makes them cheaper and easier to use. However, the report said some of the hopes for superconductivity are overblown. For example, magnetically levitated trains still may not be practical in spite of higher-temperature materials, said Ralph Gomory, the chairman of the panel and the chief scientist of International Business Machines Corp. The proposed consortiums would close the gap between the short-term profit focus of industry laboratories and the long-term scientific focus of university laboratories, Gomory said. Americans are probably ``neck-and-neck'' with the Japanese in basic scientific research on superconductivity, Gomory said. But the report said that in terms of commercial applications, the Japanese effort is ``better structured than the U.S. both for systematically developing new materials and for coupling these developments closely to industry.'' Gomory said important commercial applications are so far off that there is plenty of time for Americans to catch up. ``Everybody's just out of the gate. Ahead or behind doesn't matter. What matters is who's better structured to run,'' he said. The committee endorsed the current system under which federal spending on superconductivity work is divided among five agencies. On the science front, it said universities should continue to be the focal point for research, partly because they are best suited to train future generations of scientists in the new field. According to the proposal, the consortiums would have a 10-year lifespan and include 20 or more researchers with perhaps twice as many students. ``This proposal minimizes the role of government, builds on the strength of the American university system and strongly involves the third essential element, industry.'' Here is what the committee concluded about particular industries: AEROSPACE: New superconducting materials could be used in the frigid cold of outer space, a relatively small market. Other uses are at least a decade away. CHEMICALS: Chemical companies are interested in supplying superconducting materials, but cannot do so until a market develops. ELECTRONICS: Superconducting materials could be used in conjunction with standard semiconductors in hybrid circuits. Densely packed chips probably will need to have superconducting wiring by around the end of the century. POWER GENERATION: There is ``at least a possibility'' for the use of superconducting materials in underground power transmission, in transformers and in ship propulsion. TRANSPORTATION: Unless materials can be found that are superconductive at temperatures well above room temperature, ``the impact on the automotive industry appears to be minimal.'' Likewise, magnetically levitated trains are not much more economically feasible with the latest higher-temperature superconductors than they were with low-temperature materials. In addition to Gomory, committee members included IBM scientist Praveen Chaudhari; H. Kent Bowen of Massachusetts Institute of Technology; John Foster, vice president for science and technology at TRW Inc.; Ted Geballe of Stanford University; Ken Oshman, a founder of Rolm Corp.; and J.R. Schrieffer of the University of California at Santa Barbara, who won a Nobel Prize for superconductivity research. 
The energy futures market began 1989 the same way it ended the old year: on a strong note. On the New York Mercantile Exchange, the February contract for heating oil rose 0.94 cent Tuesday to settle at 53.23 cents a gallon, after rising 0.71 cent on Friday. The market was closed on Monday in observance of New Year's Day. The February contract for wholesale unleaded gasoline, another refined petroleum product traded on the exchange, closed at 47.27 cents a gallon, up .14 cent from Friday, when it gained 0.87 cent. January West Texas Intermediate, the benchmark grade of U.S. crude oil, increased 12 cents to settle at $17.36 a barrel. The contract rose 43 cents on Friday. Traders said strong seasonal demand for heating oil added a positive tone to the market Tuesday. Traders also remain optimistic that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries will adhere to its new production quotas, which went into effect Jan. 1. The 13-nation cartel agreed in November to hold daily production to 18.5 million barrels to help prop up sagging worldwide oil prices. 
Former securities executive Boyd L. Jefferies, one of the biggest victims of the Ivan Boesky insider trading scandal, has begun testimony as the government's star witness in the trial of GAF Corp. and one of its officers on stock manipulation and fraud charges. Tuesday's appearance was the first time the former chairman of Los Angeles-based Jefferies &amp; Co., a key source of evidence in at least three major prosecutions of alleged securities fraud, has testified in open court since he was implicated in the Boesky scandal nearly two years ago. Jefferies told the court about a series of discussions he had with James T. Sherwin, vice chairman of the GAF, concerning the alleged manipulation of Union Carbide stock in late 1986. ``I had spoken to him quite often,'' Jefferies said. ``I learned to recognize his voice.'' Sherwin and GAF, a Wayne, N.J.-based chemical company, were indicted by a federal grand jury here in July on charges of stock manipulation, securities fraud, wire fraud, conspiracy and other crimes for their alleged attempt to boost the price of Carbide, the former target of a failed GAF takeover attempt. The indictment said the motive of the alleged manipulation was to a create the false impression that Carbide stock was rising, drawing buying interest from other investors and thereby maximizing GAF's gain from the sale of a huge chunk of Carbide stock it had acquired. Sherwin allegedly asked two unidentified Jefferies &amp; Co. traders to make Carbide's stock rise by purchasing it, and he promised to reimburse them for any losses that might occur. Jefferies testified that the brokerage ultimately lost about $40,000 on the Carbide transaction. Jefferies said when he told Sherwin he was going to send him an investment banking bill to cover the loss, `He said, fine.''' Federal prosecutors said Jefferies may be on the stand all week in the jury trial before U.S. District Judge Mary J. Lowe, which began early last month. GAF and Sherwin have vowed to vindicate themselves in court. If convicted on all charges, the defendants face severe penalties. Sherwin could receive a maximum sentence of 50 years in prison and a $2.5 million fine. GAF faces $15 million in fines. It is the first case to go to trial in the prosecutions that stem from disclosures by Boesky, the now-imprisoned inside trader who turned state's evidence and paid the government $100 million in penalties in November 1986. Four months later Boesky's revelations led them to Jefferies, who negotiated his own plea bargain and promised to cooperate in exchange for lenient treatment. He agreed to plead guilty to two criminal charges, for which has not yet been sentenced. In addition, he resigned as chairman of the company that bears his name and promised to stay out of the securities business for five years. Jefferies has proven to be one of the biggest sources of evidence in Boesky-related prosecutions, and is expected to be the main government witness in separate cases that have been brought against takeover speculators Salim B. ``Sandy'' Lewis and Paul Bilzerian. 
The Big Three automakers, the soft drink makers Coca-Cola and Pepsico and oil giants Exxon Corp. and Atlantic Richfield Co. are among the best places for blacks to work, a magazine survey says. Black Enterprise magazine released a list of 35 companies Tuesday, saying those included were chosen for the employers' commitment to affirmative action and minority recruitment. Earl G. Graves, the magazine's editor and publisher, said the recent waves of corporate downsizing, takeovers and restructuring ``have significantly impacted on the numbers of black employees and advancement opportunities for blacks in some companies.'' But, he added, ``Our survey clearly indicates there are still many in the corporate community strongly committed to the creation of a work place in which minorities can make solid professional contributions and gain positions of power and influence. ``Our report also shows the impetus for strong affirmative action in corporate policy must come from the top down and be based on bottom-line incentives for managers to support these efforts,'' Graves said. To compile the list of 35 companies with the best affirmative action records, Black Enterprise said it surveyed 270 employers on the number of minority professional and non-professional employees, compensation, minority recruitment, management training and employee development programs, minority vending opportunities and contributions to black organizations. Others on the list include International Business Machines Corp., Avon Products Inc., Eastman Kodak Co., Gannett Co. Inc., McDonald's Corp. and Amtrak. The magazine cited IBM for the fact that blacks comprise 12.3 percent of its 3,850 managers; Avon for an in-house management training program; Kodak for its aggressive minority recruiting and minority scholarships; Gannett for rewarding managers for meeting affirmative action goals; McDonald's for its career-development and training programs; and Amtrak for the ``sharp teeth'' of its affirmative action program. Graves said minorities are expected to fill the employment rolls as the nation's labor force shrinks. ``Companies who are now creating corporate cultures which include minorities will be better positioned to meet the challenges of domestic and international markets in the not-too-distant future,'' Graves said. The list is contained in the magazine's February issue, scheduled to be on newsstands Jan. 19. 
Here are the companies and government agencies where affirmative action and minority recruitment efforts are strongest, according to Black Enterprise magazine: American Telephone &amp; Telegraph, New York. Amtrak, Washington D.C. Anheuser-Busch, St. Louis. Atlantic Richfield, Los Angeles. Avon Products, New York. Chase Manhattan, New York. Chrysler, Detroit. Coca-Cola, Atlanta. Adolph Coors, Golden, Colo. Eastman Kodak, Rochester, N.Y. Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States, New York. Exxon, New York. Federal Express, Memphis, Tenn. Ford Motor, Detroit. Gannett, Arlington, Va. General Mills, Minneapolis. General Motors, Detroit. Hallmark, Kansas City. International Business Machines, Armonk, N.Y. Johnson &amp; Johnson, New Brunswick, N.J. Kellogg, Battle Creek, Mich. Kraft, Glenview, Ill. McDonald's, Oak Brook, Ill. Merck, Rahway, N.J. North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance, Durham, N.C. J.C. Penney, Plano, Texas. Pepsico, Purchase, N.Y. Philip Morris, New York. Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, New York. Procter &amp; Gamble, Cincinnati. Ryder System, Miami. Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons, New York. Soft Sheen Products, Chicago. U.S. armed forces, Washington D.C. Xerox, Stamford, Conn. 
Shares prices headed higher at midday today on the London Stock Exchange. The Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index was up 6.8 points, or 0.4 percent, at 1,789.6 shortly after noon local time. That was below its midmorning best level of 1,791.7 but above its early morning low of 1,785.3. Midday volume totaled 186.5 million shares, up from 115.5 million Tuesday. Analysts said buying interest remained slight and spotty in the absence of a clear short-term direction for the market. 
Chrysler Motors Corp. says it will make a 300-horsepower, V-10 engine during the 1990s primarily for trucks but possibly for sports cars. Company engineer Chris Theodore said the engine, with a displacement of about 8 liters, is being designed mainly to compete with engines in full-size pickups made by General Motors Corp. and Ford Motor Co. However, officials said Tuesday as Chrysler showed off six of its futuristic ``concept cars,'' that it may be used in automobiles. The engine was in one of the concept cars on Tuesday _ the Dodge Viper R-T10. Thomas Gale, vice president of product design at Chrysler Motors, the car-building arm of Chrysler Corp., said the engine would be made in the Detroit area, but refused to be specific about details. Chrysler now makes a 318-cubic-inch V-8 at its Mound Road engine plant in Detroit. ``Jokingly we call it King Kong,'' Theodore said. ``I'm sure it will have another name before it goes into production.'' 
Interest rates on short-term government securities rose to the highest level in more than 3{ years in the latest Treasury auction. The Treasury Department sold $7.2 billion in three-month bills at an average discount rate of 8.24 percent Tuesday, up from 8.22 percent last week. Another $7.2 billion was sold in six-month bills at an average discount rate of 8.37 percent, up from 8.33 percent last week. The rates were the highest since three-month bills sold for 8.41 percent on March 25, 1985, and six-month bills averaged 8.56 on April 8, 1985. The new discount rates understate the actual return to investors _ 8.53 percent for three-month bills with a $10,000 bill selling for $9,791.70 and 8.86 percent for six-month bills selling for $9,576.90. 
The value of European Economic Community food in storage fell by 56 percent to $5.4 billion in the year ended Sept. 30, with the amount of surplus butter showing the most dramatic decline, the 12-nation trading bloc said Wednesday. The EEC's ``butter mountain'' declined by 837,000 metric tons to 221,000 metric tons in the 12-month period starting Sept. 30, 1987. It costs the EEC about $354 a year for every metric ton of butter held in cooled storage. Other surplus stocks also declined in the year to Sept. 30. Cereals fell 3 million tons to 10.7 million tons, and stocks of powdered milk fell by 708,000 tons to reach 14,000 tons. ``The reduction in the value of the stocks is the result of an active policy of selling off'' cereals, butter and powdered milk at reduced rates, EEC Commission said. In recent years, the EEC has revamped its agricultural policy by cutting prices and fixing quotas in the dairy and selected other sectors to prevent a buildup of surplus stocks. 
American auto buyers will get their first look at Japan's new entries into the luxury car market at this year's annual auto show in the carmaking capital of the nation. Nissan Motor Corp.'s Infiniti line and Toyota Motor Corp.'s Lexus line are intended to compete with European luxury cars like Mercedes-Benz and BMW. Toyota, meanwhile, is continuing a legal battle with Mead Data Central Inc. over whether the Lexus name infringed on Mead's trademark for its Lexis data bank. The North American International Auto Show opened to the news media on Tuesday and will open to the public this weekend. More than 400,000 people are expected during its nine-day run at Cobo Hall in downtown Detroit. ``There will be some glitches, but everything is pretty much on track,'' Dan Hayes, executive vice president of the Detroit Automobile Dealers Association, which sponsors the show, said Tuesday. Such events in Europe often are sponsored by manufacturers, but in the United States, dealers typically put them on. A competing Chicago show runs from Feb. 11-19. But this year, organizers of the Detroit show say they are giving Chicago a run for its money. The number of exhibits will increase to 41, 17 more than in 1988. Floor space has increased by 60 percent to about 700,000 square feet. Some of the exhibitors are using two stories to show off their products and most will have audio or video presentations and models explaining ride, comfort and suspensions of new cars. Hayes and other association executives like to brag about the ``firsts'' scheduled for this show. Also, Motor Trend magazine has moved its announcement for the 1989 car of the year to the Detroit show for the first time and several car companies are showing off their latest crop of ``concept cars,'' vehicles which may indicate the future of driving. Chrysler Corp. showed off six of its concept cars Tuesday at the company headquarters in Highland Park. They include the tiny Plymouth Speedster, just under 11 feet long, or about a foot shorter than the width of a highway traffic lane, and the aerodynamic-appearing Jeep concept vehicle. 
New orders to U.S. factories for manufactured goods rose a modest 0.3 percent in November, overcoming declines in the military and transportation sectors, the government said today. The Commerce Department said orders for durable and non-durable goods climbed to a seasonally adjusted $227.7 billion, up $630 million from the October number. Orders had increased a sharp 2.0 percent in October after falling 1.9 percent in September. Over the last several months, new orders have followed a see-saw pattern, pushed back and forth by fluctuations in the volatile defense and transportation sectors. Defense orders plummeted 16.7 percent to $8.9 billion in November, following a 43.2 percent increase in October. Transportation orders fell 6.1 percent to $32.8 billion, with declines posted in all subcategories except commercial aircraft. In October, transporation orders soared 10.4 percent. Excluding the military, orders in November rose a strong 1.1 percent following a 0.6 percent gain a month earlier. Excluding transportation, orders rose 1.4 percent in November and 0.5 percent in October. Meanwhile, the key category of non-defense capital goods, a closely watched barometer of industry investment plans, rose 3.0 percent in November to a seasonally adjusted $35.7 billion. It has fallen 0.7 percent in October and 10.2 percent in September, raising concern that the year-long boom in capital spending was tapering off. American manufacturers have enjoyed brisk export sales as the decline in the value of the dollar has lowered the cost of U.S. goods overseas. Consequently, they have increased spending to modernize and expand their factories. Orders for durable goods, ``big ticket'' items ranging from toasters to tanks, were virtually unchanged in November at $122.8 billion. However, electrical machinery shot up 8.3 percent on the strength of a 26.2 percent gain in orders for communication equipment, most of it from the military. Orders for non-durable goods climbed 0.6 percent in November following a 0.9 percent gain a month before. The department said gains at chemical plants and textile mills accounted for most of the gains. Shipments of manufactured goods were up 0.5 percent in November to a seasonally adjusted $224.1 billion. 
Securities brokerage Security Pacific Hoare Govett announced Wednesday it was getting out of the British and international bond markets and laying off 140 people. Chief executive Peter Voss said the company was abandoning the bond market operations because of increasing competitive pressures and its assessment that the markets will remain unattractive for the next three to five years. He also announced that the company's Japanese operations will be reshaped so that Security Pacific Hoare Govett will no longer be marketing Japanese shares and warrants. The announcement by Security Pacific Hoare Govett, the international merchant banking arm of Security Pacific merchant bank, was the latest in a series of cutbacks by firms in London's financial district. Merchant bankers Morgan Grenfell laid off 450 staff just before Christmas when it ceased the wholesale buying and selling of shares due to a lack of recovery in the stock market following the October 1984 crash. Stockbroker McCaughan Dyson Capel Myers laid off 40 stockbroking analysts and sales staff in early December when it closed its department dealing with research services in the European markets. Exco, the money market subsidiary of British and Commonwealth, closed its PG Securities operation with the loss of 56 jobs in early December. PG Securities was a broker in the Eurobond market. Bond market business tripled after the deregulation of Britain's financial markets, known as Big Bang, in October 1986 but the market had to support nearly 30 dealers compared with five before. 
Stock prices advanced broadly today, recovering some of the losses they suffered in the first session of 1989. The Dow Jones average of 30 industrials rose 5.54 to 2,150.18 in the first half hour of trading. Gainers outnumbered losers by more than 2 to 1 in nationwide trading of New York Stock Exchange-listed issues, with 644 up, 296 down and 482 unchanged. Volume on the Big Board came to 20.63 million shares as of 10 a.m. on Wall Street. The dollar rose in foreign-exchange trading this morning, reversing its decline Tuesday. Analysts said traders bid the dollar up amid the uncertainty raised by news that U.S. planes shot down two Libyan fighter jets over the Mediterranean Sea. But demand for stocks was limited, brokers said, by caution in advance of Friday's report from the government on the employment situation for December. If the data show strong growth in payroll employment, many Wall Streeters believe the Federal Reserve would be more likely to tighten credit further in its campaign to keep inflation from flaring up again. Among the blue chips, General Motors rose \ to 82{; Coca-Cola { to 44; International Business Machines ] to 121], and General Electric \ to 44\. The NYSE's composite index of all its listed common stocks gained .26 to 155.24. At the American Stock Exchange, the market value index was up .21 at 305.45. On Tuesday the Dow Jones industrial average lost 23.93 points to close at 2,144.64. Declining issues outnumbered advances by about 3 to 2 in nationwide trading of New York Stock Exchange-listed stocks, with 619 up, 942 down and 424 unchanged. Volume on the floor of the Big Board came to 128.50 million shares, against 127.21 million in Friday's session. 
Grand Metropolitan PLC has completed its tender offer to acquire Pillsbury Co. common stock at $66 per share for a total value of about $5.7 billion, the British conglomerate said Wednesday. Approximately 98.7 percent of the 85.8 million outstanding Pillsbury shares had been accepted for payment by Grand Met following completion of the tender offer on Tuesday, Grand Met said. Grand Met, a distilling and retailing giant, acquired the Minneapolis-based food and restaurant company last month after nearly three months of negotiations and court hearings. 
General Motors Corp. executives today rolled out a new line of multipurpose passenger vehicles for 1990 and for the first time included an Oldsmobile MPV in its stable. William W. Lane, Oldsmobile General manager, said the utility vehicle will give Olds the chance to capitalize on the growth in the minivan market. The trend was started and is dominated largely by Chrysler Corp. Chevrolet General Manager Bob Burger said Chevrolet's Lumina, Oldsmobile's Silhouette, and the Pontiac Transport SE, will be built at the GM plant in Tarrytown, N.Y. Production of the vehicles is expected to reach 100,000 during the 1990 model year, rising to 225,000 in later years, Burger said. Lane said he expects the minivan market to sell 1 million vehicles a year in the 1990s, compared with 750,000 sold annually now. Chevrolet and Pontiac currently produce minivans and share the GM production on a rough 65 percent to 35 percent basis, Burger said. Lane declined to speculate on what percentage Oldsmobile would garner in the new production. He predicted most of Oldsmobile sales would come from crossovers from other manufactuers. The GM guiding principle, he said, is ``he who sells them is the one who earns them,'' meaning that sales dictate the production split among GM divisions. Lane said Oldsmobile decided to enter the minivan business because 1.1 million customers switched from cars to light trucks in 1988. ``Among those buyers who crossed over to the light truck market, 34 percent purchased a midsized van,'' he said. In an elaborate news conference featuring the three MPVs, the Lumina sedan, the Corvette ZR-1, the Pontiac Stinger concept car and Oldsmobile's Aerotech II, GM officials said the company is moving forward quickly in aerodynamic design. It was the first time GM divisions have shared a news conference to unveil new vehicles. The displays were presented at the North American International Auto Show, which opens to the public Saturday in Detroit. Forty-one other manufacturers are showing off new models designed to attract a greater share of the 15 million-vehicle U.S. car and truck market. 
Stock prices staged a broad advance today, recovering some of the losses they suffered in the first session of 1989. The Dow Jones average of 30 industrials, down 23.93 points on Tuesday, rose 13.04 to 2,157.68 by 11 a.m. today on Wall Street. Gainers outnumbered losers by more than 5 to 2 in nationwide trading of New York Stock Exchange-listed issues, with 930 up, 345 down and 500 unchanged. Volume on the Big Board came to 45.59 million shares at midmorning. The dollar rose in foreign-exchange trading this morning, reversing its decline Tuesday. Analysts said traders bid the dollar up amid the uncertainty raised by news that U.S. planes shot down two Libyan fighter jets over the Mediterranean Sea. But demand for stocks was limited, brokers said, by caution in advance of Friday's report from the government on the employment situation for December. If the data show strong growth in payroll employment, many Wall Streeters believe the Federal Reserve would be more likely to tighten credit further in its campaign to keep inflation from flaring up again. Among the blue chips, General Motors rose ] to 82|; Coca-Cola { to 44; International Business Machines ] to 121], and General Electric ] to 44]. Freeport-McMoRan climbed 1| to 29|. The company's directors voted an increase in the quarterly dividend and special extra payouts of 25 cents a share through the third quarter of 1990. The NYSE's composite index of all its listed common stocks gained .70 to 155.68. At the American Stock Exchange, the market value index was up .50 at 305.74. 
Grain and soybean futures opened narrowly mixed today on the Chicago Board of Trade in a calm follow-through to the previous session's early run-up and late sell-off. Analysts said expectations of new export sales should continue to support the crop futures markets. ``I still think the front end of the wheat market could easily move beyond $4.50 and corn could test $3 a bushel,'' said Arthur Parrish, an analyst with Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. in New York. But they said Tuesday's heavy profit-taking, particularly in the corn and soybean pits, had taken some of the wind out of the markets' sails. ``The speculative buying that fuels major advances has been kind of hesitant,'' said Katharina Zimmer, a wheat market analyst with Merrill Lynch Capital Markets Inc. in New York. In early trading, wheat was \ cent lower to } cent higher with the contract for delivery in March at $4.39{ a bushel; corn was \ cent to 1 cent lower with March at $2.79} a bushel; oats were unchanged to { cent higher with March at $2.45 a bushel; soybeans were \ cent to 1\ cents higher with January at $8.03 a bushel. Cattle futures were lower while pork futures were higher in early trading on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. Live cattle were .20 to .50 cent lower with February at 73.67 cents a pound; feeder cattle were .10 cent to .42 cent lower with January at 84.22 cents a pound; live hogs were .12 cent to .45 cent higher with February at 46.60 cents a pound; frozen pork bellies were .23 cent to .73 cent higher with February at 43.15 cents a pound. Cattle settled higher while pork futures settled lower on Tuesday. 
The commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service said today the agency is making a major effort to ensure that taxpayers receive the right answers when they call the IRS. One of every four answers from the IRS were wrong last year, Commissioner Lawrence B. Gibbs acknowledged, ``and we've gone back to the drawing board ... to try to improve accuracy levels.'' ``We hope to improve substantially this year,'' Gibbs said as the agency launched its annual campaign to urge taxpayers to file their returns as early as possible. The IRS has increased the number of supervisors to oversee employees who answer technical questions by phone, Gibbs said. A big plus, he added, was the decision to put about 1,000 temporary telephone ``assisters'' on the permanent payroll, which has allowed the IRS to enhance their training. Gibbs said taxpayers who file early are apt to receive any refund in three or four weeks. Late filing can mean a six-week wait _ assuming the IRS encounters no problems such as computer breakdowns that plagued the 1985 filing season. He said the temporary amnesty that allowed taxpayers to pay too little of their tax in advance without penalty, mainly because of underwithholding due to the massive 1986 tax overhaul, will not be renewed. ``We are going back to business as normal ... urging people to get their withholding correct,'' Gibbs said. ``There will be penalties asserted against those who do not.'' Gibbs unveiled a series of print and broadcast commercials, donated by the Advertising Council, aimed at encouraging early filing. The central theme of the commercials is that taxpayers who procrastinate may find themselves in a nightmare of their own creation when they have to rush to meet the filing deadline. Most taxpayers will have less to fear with their 1988 returns, compared with those they filed a year ago, Gibbs said. That is because there are relatively few changes in the tax law that affect the returns due by April 17. But there is no doubt that chances of making mistakes increase when filers rush into their returns at the last minute without ample preparation, Gibbs said. Last year, taxpayers and IRS employees combined for an estimated 20 million mistakes. The agency expects 109 million returns will be filed this year, up from 107 million a year ago. About three of every four will generate refunds. 
Stock prices rallied today, recovering some of the losses they suffered in the first session of 1989. The Dow Jones average of 30 industrials, down 23.93 points on Tuesday, rose 13.57 to 2,158.21 by noontime today on Wall Street. Gainers outnumbered losers by more than 5 to 2 in nationwide trading of New York Stock Exchange-listed issues, with 947 up, 379 down and 505 unchanged. The dollar rose in foreign-exchange trading this morning, reversing its decline Tuesday. Analysts said traders bid the dollar up amid the uncertainty raised by news that U.S. planes shot down two Libyan fighter jets over the Mediterranean Sea. But demand for stocks was limited, brokers said, by caution in advance of Friday's report from the government on the employment situation for December. If the data show strong growth in payroll employment, many Wall Streeters believe the Federal Reserve would be more likely to tighten credit further in its campaign to keep inflation from flaring up again. Among the blue chips, General Motors rose { to 82}; Coca-Cola ] to 43~; International Business Machines { to 121{; Philip Morris \ to 101[, and General Electric \ to 44\. Freeport-McMoRan climbed 1~ to 29~. The company's directors voted an increase in the quarterly dividend and special extra payouts of 25 cents a share through the third quarter of 1990. Integrated Device Technology dropped 1~ to 9~ in the over-the-counter market. The company estimated lower earnings for its ``disappointing'' third fiscal quarter ended Jan. 1. The NYSE's composite index of all its listed common stocks gained .75 to 155.73. At the American Stock Exchange, the market value index was up .46 at 305.70. Volume on the Big Board came to 62.54 million shares at noontime, up from 59.83 million at the same point Tuesday. 
Orders to U.S. factories for manufactured goods increased by a modest 0.3 percent during November, according to a government report Wednesday that some economists said reflected continued but slower economic growth. Buyers placed orders worth a seasonally adjusted $227.7 billion during the month, up $630 million from October. Orders had risen 2 percent in October and fallen 1.9 percent a month earlier. For the first 11 months of the year, orders were up 9.3 percent over the comparable period in 1987. Cynthia Latta, an economist with Data Resources Inc. of Lexington, Mass., said the latest report was ``consistent with the other evidence that the economy is certainly still on the upswing'' although slower growth is expected during 1989. Orders for ``big ticket'' durable goods, items expected to last at least three years, were virtually unchanged during November at $122.8 billion, although there was a hefty 8.3 percent increase in requests for electrical machinery, mostly communication equipment for the military. In the volatile transportation and defense industries, orders were down 6.1 percent and 16.7 percent, respectively, following increases in the previous month of 10.4 percent and 43.2 percent. Virtually all transportation categories except commercial aircraft declined in November. Among non-durable goods, orders were up 0.6 percent to $105 billion, following a 0.9 percent gain in October. The largest November increases among orders for non-durable goods were in chemicals and textile mill products, while the biggest decreases were in petroleum products and apparel. Robert G. Dederick, an economist with Northern Trust Co. in Chicago, said the slower rate of growth in November indicates ``new orders seem to have lost much of their forward momentum,'' except in the civilian aircraft industry. ``If you exclude that (aircraft), orders seem to be in a bit of a lull,'' he said. ``The implication is that orders are going to have to gather steam if manufacturing is going to continue the pace of last year.'' Dederick said weaker growth is not necessarily bad, given a Federal Reserve Board preference for subdued growth to stave off inflation. Samuel D. Kahan, of Kleinwort Benson Government Securities in Chicago, said that while the November increase was modest, ``the trend is still up. Moreover, the backlog of unfilled orders continues to rise, suggesting that growth in industrial production still will be fairly good.'' He said growth in the fourth quarter of 1988 had been expected to be strong but debate still was open on ``whether there will be some kind of slowing in the new year. So far, the economy keeps chugging along.'' In the key category of non-defense capital goods, which reflect industry investment plans, orders were up 3 percent, much of it due to demand for civilian aircraft. Jerry Jasinowski of the National Association of Manufacturers said the report indicated ``a robust order picture for manufacturing in general.'' ``We are not getting any reports from manufacturers of any slowdown in orders across the broad spectrum in manufacturing, indicating the capital spending boom is going to continue in 1989,'' he said. Shipments of manufactured goods were up 0.5 percent in November to a seasonally adjusted $224.1 billion. 
L. William Seidman is a lot like a protective parent when it comes to the nation's banking funds. Nothing gets his guard up more than talk of a proposed matchup between his ``baby,'' the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., which insures commercial bank deposits, and the wayward thrift insurer, the Federal Savings &amp; Loan Insurance Corp. ``People keep telling us they have to get married, and we're looking at the bride very carefully,'' said Seidman, FDIC chairman for the past three years and one of the most forceful regulators in Washington. As he tries to help set the banking agenda for the Bush administration, Seidman (pronounced Seed-Mun) is blunt about his feelings on the thrift crisis and opposition to an FDIC-FSLIC merger, which some propose as a step toward solving FSLIC's money problems. Banks, though, worry such a merger will result in skyrocketing insurance premiums. ``There was a time when you could have merged the two. (But) a merger now will bankrupt the funds,'' Seidman said in an interview. Unlike the FDIC, FSLIC is technically insolvent due to the large number of problem-thrift bailouts. Last year alone, FSLIC spent $38.6 billion to help merge or sell 222 insolvent S&amp;Ls. Hundreds more remain financially shaky. Seidman proposes, among other things, that the government bite the bullet by spending another $30 billion in 1989 to close 100 of the sickest thrifts. The other problem S&amp;Ls could be dealt with over a longer period of time. He also wants the government to consider revamping the entire deposit insurance system to include new broad powers for his agency and splitting FSLIC from its parent, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board. ``If I were advising the president I think he should do it (resolve the thrift crisis) early on in the honeymoon days ... when it's someone else's problem,'' he said. ``If he waits too long, it becomes his problem. It's not a politically attractive issue.'' Seidman's zeal is understandable. He had his own problems after taking the helm of the FDIC in October 1985, becoming its 14th chairman. For one thing, he inherited the fallout from Continental Illinois Corp.'s near demise a year before. During his tenure, Seidman has contended with more than 600 bank failures, including a post-Depression record 221 in 1988. The FDIC posted its first operating loss last year, although it remains firmly solvent, with a net worth of around $15 billion at the end of 1988. Seidman, 67, came to the job with surprising little banking experience. At the time of his appointment, he was dean of the College of Business at Arizona State University. Before that, he served as vice chairman at copper giant Phelps Dodge Corp. and a managing parter in the accounting firm Seidman &amp; Seidman, started by his father and uncle. His business acumen and investment savvy also have helped make him a millionaire many times over, and he has several homes around the country, including one in Hawaii. He shares some of his business smarts in a just-published book he co-authored, ``Competitiveness: the Executive's Guide to Success.'' Seidman also is no stranger to Republican politics. From 1974 to 1977 he served as assistant for economic affairs under President Ford, a childhood friend from his hometown Grand Rapids, Mich. From 1983 to 1984 he was co-chairman of the White House Conference on Productivity. He also ran an unsuccessful campaign to become Michigan auditor general in the 1960s. All that experience ``and my good looks,'' Seidman said, has helped in tackling the banking world. There have been some big issues to tackle, including: the Latin debt problem, the campaign to expand into investment banking, and lately, the debt-financed takeover craze, which Seidman warns could endanger big lending banks. ``My experience says that credibility is the No. 1 asset you have to have,'' Seidman said, ``and telling it like it is is the best way to deal with things.'' A free-market advocate, Seidman has been called a team player by those who know him well. But he's also not afraid to speak his mind. For instance, at the American Bankers Association annual convention in Honolulu last fall, a red-faced Seidman denounced the comptroller of the currency, Robert L. Clarke, who is on the board of the FDIC, for suggesting that commercial banks prepare for a possible FDIC-FSLIC merger. Just the day before the two men held a friendly, informal news conference. ``He (Seidman) feels very strongly that the resolution (of the thrift crisis) should not come on the backs of commercial banks,'' said James J. McDermott Jr., a banking analyst with the investment firm Keefe Bruyette &amp; Woods. ``He has been a good steward for the industry at a time when the effects of deregulation (of the 1970s) have caused signficant turmoil as shown by the bank failures over the years. ``He has been a breath of fresh air.'' Short, stout and nearly bald, Seidman bares a slight resemblance to the late actor William Frawley, known as Fred Mertz on the ``I Love Lucy'' television series. He has the same gravelly voice. But he's far more physically active than the Mertz character was, enjoying polo and a variety of other sports _ and not as grouchy, especially to his six children and several grandchildren. ``He knows how to relax. It's a wonderful gift,'' said his wife, Sally. ``He could have a horrendous day and then he just forgets about it when he gets home.'' While at work, Seidman also tries to keep things informal, remaining accessible to banking analysts and the press. If it were up to him, he'd probably be wearing sweat shirts and casual slacks to work. Before attending a recent ABA dinner in Honolulu, ``He asked me, `Do you think I have to wear a suit and tie?','' Mrs. Seidman confided. ``And I said, `Yeah, you better.''' 
The World Bank is raising interest rates for more prosperous Third World countries to 7.65 percent annually, the first such increase since the bank began lending at variable rates in 1982, officials said Wednesday. The rate will apply during the first six months of this year on $37 billion worth of loans to about 70 countries, said Sheldon Rappaport, a spokesman for the bank. For the second half of 1988, the rate was 7.59 percent. The increase amounts to only 0.06 percent but will cost the borrowers an additional $11 million, Rappaport estimated. The rate is based on the cost of the bank's own borrowings and will be recalculated in mid-1989. The bank gets most of its funds from borrowing on world markets. The bank is owned by 151 governments, with the United States holding the largest block of shares, and is the biggest single source of aid to Third World countries used to help raise their living standards. It lends more than $19 billion a year. When it introduced variable interest rates on most of its loans in July 1982, the annual rate was 11.43 percent. Since then, the rate has been reduced each time it was recalculated, twice a year. The poorest countries, which borrow from the bank's International Development Association, will continue to get loans for 40 years at less than 1 percent a year, with long grace periods during which only interest is due. 
The nation's chief tax collector urged Americans on Wednesday to file returns early this year and said the IRS for its part will fully respect a new ``taxpayer bill of rights'' and try to provide filers better advice. Lawrence B. Gibbs, commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service, said of the taxpayer-rights bill at a news conference.``We feel it is a good bill ... (and) we are going to implement the letter as well as the spirit of the law,'' The legislation, enacted in reponse to scattered reports of abuses by IRS employees, requires the agency to fully inform taxpayers of their rights any time an audit is begun. Other provisions extend the notice required before the IRS can seize property and prohibit the agency from promoting employees on the basis of how much they collect. Gibbs acknowledged that IRS employees gave the wrong answer to one of every four technical questions asked last filing season. ``We were not satisfied last year,'' he said, ``and we've gone back to the drawing board ... to try to improve accuracy levels.'' ``We hope to improve substantially this year,'' said Robert LeBaube, director of taxpayer services. One significant factor, he said, is that the IRS was able to put on the permanent payroll 1,000 ``telephone assisters'' who in past years would have been hired only for the tax season. This allowed the agency to intensify the training of those employees. ``There is a clear correlation between experience and accuracy,'' LeBaube said. In addition, the number of assisters working under each supervisor has been reduced from about 20 to about 12, he said. Gibbs said the IRS is convinced that taxpayers who file early, avoiding time pressures that grow near the filing deadline, are much more likely to have an error-free return. For that reason, the IRS, the Advertising Council and the news media are combining efforts again this year to deliver the ``file early'' message. ``Make your taxes less taxing,'' read the print ads. ``Do them today.'' The television commercials attempt, in a good-natured way, to scare taxpayers into not waiting until the April 17 filing deadline. ``Why let it haunt you when you can do something about it? asks one commercial featuring a howling wind and a bewildered taxpayer who might have stepped off another planet. Gibbs said most taxpayers will have less to be confused about than they did a year ago. Most of the hundreds of changes brought about by the 1986 tax overhaul showed up for the first time on returns filed last year. There are very few significant changes affecting returns that will be filed this year. Early filers are likely to get any refund within three or four weeks, Gibbs said. Those who file in late March or April may have to wait six weeks or longer. Taxpayers in 36 states who qualify for refunds may be able to file their returns electronically this year. The remaining states will be added next year. As many as 2 million returns _ four times the number last year _ are expected to be filed electronically this year, Gibbs said. Electronic returns must be filed through paid professional return preparers, from one computer to another. This significantly reduces IRS paperwork. The agency expects 109 million returns to be filed this year, up from 107 million a year ago. About three of every four will generate refunds. Gibbs said the IRS will not renew a temporary amnesty that last year allowed taxpayers to avoid a penalty when they had too little tax withheld from their paychecks. ``We are going back to business as normal ... urging people to get their withholding correct,'' Gibbs said. ``There will be penalties asserted against those who do not.'' In general, taxpayers have until Jan. 17 to pay 90 percent of estimated 1988 tax liability and avoid any underpayment penalty. Taxpayers with significant amounts of income not subject to withholding _ such as interest and dividends _ could be subject to penalties unless they meet that 90 percent target. 
Stock prices showed a broad gain today, recovering some of the losses they suffered in the first session of 1989. The Dow Jones average of 30 industrials, down 23.93 points on Tuesday, rose 18.04 to 2,162.68 by 2 p.m. today on Wall Street. Gainers outnumbered losers by more than 5 to 2 in nationwide trading of New York Stock Exchange-listed issues, with 1,031 up, 404 down and 473 unchanged. The dollar rose in foreign-exchange trading today, reversing its decline Tuesday. Analysts said traders bid the dollar up amid the uncertainty raised by news that U.S. planes shot down two Libyan fighter jets over the Mediterranean Sea. But demand for stocks was limited, brokers said, by caution in advance of Friday's report from the government on the employment situation for December. If the data show strong growth in payroll employment, many Wall Streeters believe the Federal Reserve would be more likely to tighten credit further in its campaign to keep inflation from flaring up again. Among the blue chips, General Motors rose | to 82~; Coca-Cola } to 44\; International Business Machines 1[ to 122[; Philip Morris \ to 101[, and General Electric | to 44|. Freeport-McMoRan climbed 2] to 30]. The company's directors voted an increase in the quarterly dividend and special extra payouts of 25 cents a share through the third quarter of 1990. Integrated Device Technology dropped 1} to 10 in the over-the-counter market. The company estimated lower earnings for its ``disappointing'' third fiscal quarter ended Jan. 1. The NYSE's composite index of all its listed common stocks gained 1.09 to 156.07. At the American Stock Exchange, the market value index was up .75 at 305.99. Volume on the Big Board came to 93.72 million shares with two hours to go. 
Eli Lilly &amp; Co. has been barred temporarily from hiring a former product manager for a competing pharmaceuticals company on the grounds that he knows too many trade secrets. Marion Superior Court Judge James S. Kirsch issued a temporary restraining order Monday to stop Lilly from hiring Robert B. Summers of Indianapolis. Summers had been an employee of the Indianapolis division of Boehringer Mannheim Corp., a subsidiary of a multi-national pharmaceuticals company based in Germany. Boehringer alleged in court documents that Summers ``has knowledge of Boehringer trade secrets,'' and could use them to do ``irreparable harm'' to the company. Boehringer is seeking a permanent injunction barring Summers from ever working for Lilly. Kirsch's order is temporary, pending a hearing Friday. Summers had worked as a product manager in Boehringer's diagnostics division before Lilly hired him to be manager of marketing services for Elco Diagnostics Co., a new Lilly unit to market diagnostic products. Among the first products to be marketed by the new Lilly division will be a glucose monitor and a line of insulin pumps. Summers had access to confidential information about similar products at Boehringer, a subsidiary of BMC International Ltd., according to court documents. The company said Summers' acceptance of the job would violate a non-competition agreement he signed with Boehringer. Boehringer officials said Summers had agreed not to work for any competitor for six months should he leave the company. He resigned Dec. 20. Edward A. West, a spokesman for Lilly, said the Indianapolis-based company was reviewing the court order and would have no comment. 
When the National Football League's top two teams brawl in Miami on Jan. 22 for Super Bowl XXIII, one of the unsung heros will be the hybrid grass on the playing field developed near this tiny south Georgia town. Southern Turf Nurseries Inc., a leader in constructing and renovating athletic fields and golf courses, gave Miami's Joe Robbie Stadium a state-of-the-art playing field last year, using a tough strain developed at the University of Georgia's Coastal Plain Experiment Station in Tifton and a patented underground moisture-control system. The grass covers spots quickly and is extremely durable but plush. It's used in nearly all new athletic fields and golf courses in the Southeast, said Southern Turf spokesman Steve Mathis. ``A good athletic field is expensive,'' Mathis said. ``We can build a field for less than $100,000 without drainage. But it can go to $1 million for a top-of-the line baseball field.'' Omega, a rural farming community of 1,000 residents, has a couple of cotton gins and some turn-of-the century brick buildings that house a grocery store, a hardware store and a few other businesses. During the summer, 15 to 18 tractor trailers leave the Omega farm every day to supply Southern Turf crews working all over the Southeast. The firm also air freights sod and sprigs around the world. ``When our little phone rings here in Omega, it could be somebody in Hong Kong,'' said General Manager Steve Gibson. ``You never know who might call.'' At the Dolphins' stadium, workers installed a system dubbed Prescription Athletic Turf, or PAT. PAT fields have a network of pipes beneath the grass for irrigating when the soil is too dry and removing moisture when it is too wet. Southern Turf has installed similar systems at Florida State University's stadium in Tallahassee and at Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium, home of the National Football League's Atlanta Falcons and baseball's Atlanta Braves. To install a PAT system, workers remove the top 12 inches of soil, level the field and dig a network of shallow ditches that provide clearance for the water pipes. After the entire field is covered with plastic, a bulldozer pushes sand over the plastic and workers cover the sand with a layer of peat moss. Workers use machines to blend the peat moss and sand, forming a new 12-inch layer of topsoil, then grass sprigs are planted or sod installed. Sensors buried in the field turn the system's pumps on and off, maintaining proper moisture levels. ``Most people, when they see a field, only see the grass,'' said Mathis. ``The real work is underneath.'' Artificial turf is more expensive to install and maintain than natural grass, and it is less popular with players, Mathis said. Some experts believe artificial turf contributes to sports injuries. ``Instead of mowing it, you're scrubbing it, trying to remove the blood, the chewing tobacco and the beer,'' he said. ``In seven to 10 years you have to spend another $500,000 replacing the rug.'' After Southern Turf installs a grass field, it's the groundskeepers' responsibility to maintain it. The Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium Authority recently ordered 1,200 square feet of sod to repair unsafe and unsightly areas. Steve Ortmayer, the San Diego Chargers' director of football operations, described the playing surface as ``the poorest I've ever seen.'' Mathis said such comments are embarrassing for his firm and he is optimistic the stadium authority will heed the company's suggestion to hire a year-round groundskeeper. At present the stadium has a groundskeeper only for baseball. ``We know our job was done right,'' said Mathis. ``We've recommended on several occasions that they hire a man 12 months a year.'' Since its founding 40 years ago, Southern Turf has planted more than 2,000 athletic fields and golf courses around the world, including the Augusta National Golf &amp; Country Club in Augusta, Ga., where the Masters Tournament is played, the Assayegh Soccer Field in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, and the Royal Hong Kong Jockey Club. Customers also include the Daytona International Speedway, the Gator Bowl, the Orange Bowl, the New Orleans Saints, Hialeah race track and many major universitie Southeast, including the University of Georgia. 
Grain and soybean futures closed strongly higher Wednesday on the Chicago Board of Trade with wheat and soybeans gaining sharply on reports of new export business. Wheat for near-month delivery surged to a 7{-year high near $4.50 a bushel on news that China had bought 440,000 metric tons of U.S. wheat at subsidized prices, analysts said. Soybeans for January delivery climbed more than 14 cents a bushel on rumors that the Chinese were seeking to buy as much as 1 million metric tons of U.S. soybeans. ``The best performer overall has been the wheat market,'' said grain-market analyst Arthur Parrish with Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. in New York. ``Wheat's an export-driven market as you get into the latter part of season and with exports being such as they are, almost on a par with last year, that speaks very well of that market,'' he said. ``I continue to see more upside in wheat.'' At the close, wheat was 4 cents to 8\ cents higher with the contract for delivery in March at $4.47{ a bushel; corn was 2{ cents to 5} cents higher with March at $2.83{ a bushel; oats were } cent to 2 cents higher with March at $2.45} a bushel; soybeans were 7 cents to 14\ cents higher with January at $8.16 a bushel. 
Stock prices turned upward today, recovering some of the losses they suffered in the first session of 1989. The Dow Jones average of 30 industrials, down 23.93 points on Tuesday, rose 17.32 to 2,161.96 by 3 p.m. today on Wall Street. Gainers outnumbered losers by more than 2 to 1 in nationwide trading of New York Stock Exchange-listed issues, with 1,050 up, 432 down and 446 unchanged. The dollar rose in foreign-exchange trading today, reversing its decline Tuesday. Analysts said traders bid the dollar up amid the uncertainty raised by news that U.S. planes shot down two Libyan fighter jets over the Mediterranean Sea. But demand for stocks was limited, brokers said, by caution in advance of Friday's report from the government on the employment situation for December. If the data show strong growth in payroll employment, many Wall Streeters believe the Federal Reserve would be more likely to tighten credit further in its campaign to keep inflation from flaring up again. Among the blue chips, General Motors rose { to 82}; Coca-Cola | to 44; International Business Machines 1 to 122; Philip Morris ] to 101\, and General Electric ] to 44]. Freeport-McMoRan climbed 2\ to 30\. The company's directors voted an increase in the quarterly dividend and special extra payouts of 25 cents a share through the third quarter of 1990. Integrated Device Technology dropped 1| to 10[ in the over-the-counter market. The company estimated lower earnings for its ``disappointing'' third fiscal quarter ended Jan. 1. The NYSE's composite index of all its listed common stocks gained 1.04 to 156.02. At the American Stock Exchange, the market value index was up .96 at 306.20. Volume on the Big Board came to 109.87 million shares with an hour to go. 
The stock market rallied sharply today, rebounding from the decline it suffered in the first session of 1989. The dollar rose in foreign-exchange trading, reversing its decline Tuesday. Analysts said traders bid the dollar up amid the uncertainty raised by news that U.S. planes shot down two Libyan fighter jets over the Mediterranean Sea. But demand for stocks was limited, brokers said, by caution in advance of Friday's report from the government on the employment situation for December. If the data show strong growth in payroll employment, many Wall Streeters believe the Federal Reserve would be more likely to tighten credit further in its campaign to keep inflation from flaring up again. 
The Dow Jones average of 30 industrials, down 23.93 on Tuesday, climbed 33.04 points to 2,177.68. Advancing issues outnumbered declines by more than 3 to 1 on the New York Stock Exchange, with 1,182 up, 328 down and 445 unchanged. Big Board volume totaled 149.70 million shares, against 128.50 million in the previous session. The NYSE's composite index rose 2.08 to 157.06. 
Braniff Inc. on Wednesday announced a bold stroke designed to put the regional airline in closer competition with the nation's major carriers, saying it will acquire 50 Airbus Industrie A320 planes and has options to get another 50 in a deal valued at up to $3.5 billion. The deal could nearly triple the fleet size of Braniff, a carrier with 53 jets that has endured three changes of ownership, a Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization, a major recapitalization and the transfer of its major operations to Kansas City from Dallas in the past six years. The airline has vowed to become a more competitive force in the industry. ``Today's announcement, I think, takes us a giant step forward toward making that goal a reality,'' William McGee, Braniff's chairman, told a news conference in New York. The move also represents one of the largest single orders for jets produced by Airbus, a European aircraft consortium that has emerged as a major competitor against the U.S. giants of the industry, Boeing Co. and McDonnell Douglas Corp. The Airbus A320 is a 150-seat, highly efficient aircraft used widely to replace aging jets, which requires only two pilots in the cockpit rather than the customary three. It was unclear how Braniff's acquisition of these planes would affect previously disclosed plans to acquire 23 Boeing 737s from AMR Corp., parent of American Airlines. ``It's a sizable infusion of new capacity in Braniff,'' said Robert Joedicke, an airline analyst for Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. ``It will certainly allow Braniff to rationalize and modernize their fleet and be much more competitive.'' Braniff currently operates 25 Boeing 727s, 10 Boeing 737s and 18 BAC-111s, built by British Aerospace PLC. Last June, investment group BIA-COR Holdings Inc. acquired Dallas-based Braniff for $100 million from Dalfort Aviation Inc., which is owned by the Pritzker family of Chicago. Through the investor group, PaineWebber Inc. controls a majority stake in the airline. The group appointed five top executives from Piedmont Airlines to manage Braniff. McGee, who had been Piedmont's chairman, helped build that airline into the nation's ninth-largest carrier, and one of the most profitable airlines, before it was acquired by USAir Group Inc. in 1987. Kevin Murphy, who follows the industry for Morgan Stanley &amp; Co., suggested that the current team at Braniff could be beefing up the airline in preparation for selling it. ``Our principal objective is to grow Kansas City,'' McGee told the news conference, referring to Braniff's main hub. He said the airline may introduce international service from Kansas City as well as first class service on existing flights. McGee said he expects Braniff to join the ranks of the airline majors _ as measured by $1 billion or more in annual revenue _ within a year and a half. The carrier should become profitable by the end of this year, the Braniff chief projected. Another airline analyst, who asked not to be identified, said Braniff needs to guard against getting too big _ the predicament which prompted its bankruptcy in 1982. ``You don't try to dance with the elephants,'' he said. McGee confirmed reports that the deal includes 16 planes originally intended for Pan Am Corp., which recently decided to scrap an order of A320s in exchange for a $115 million payment from Airbus. Pan Am had a firm order for 16 of the aircraft and an option on 34 more. In a separate statement Wednesday, Pan Am also confirmed that it had transferred the Airbus order to Braniff and announced that it will buy up to four new Airbus A310-300 long-range planes instead. ``While the A320 is a fine aircraft, our current route structure and our near-term scheduling plans do not require introduction of this aircraft type at this time,'' Pan Am Chairman Thomas G. Plaskett said. Engines for the Airbus planes, which are included in the price, will be supplied by IAE International Aero Engines, a consortium of U.S., British, West German, Japanese and Italian engine makers which is based in East Hartford, Conn. The U.S. partner is Pratt &amp; Whitney Aircraft of East Hartford. The deal would be worth the $3.5 billion only if Braniff exercises options to acquire all 100 planes. Airbus will sell the first 42 planes to a financing group, which will in turn lease them to Braniff. Airbus will have to make its own financing arrangements for the other eight in the first group of 50. The members of the financing group are GPA Group Ltd. of Shannon, Ireland, an aircraft leasing company which has an option to buy 10 percent of Braniff; Airbus; and the engine supplier, IAE. 
Borden Inc. put corporate raiders on notice Wednesday that if an unwanted buyer tries to chop up the food and chemical giant, Borden's 25 top managers will quit en masse under an unusual takeover defense. ``We think any potential raider would think twice about losing that group at once,'' said R.J. Ventres, Borden's chairman and chief executive officer. He added that he believed banks and investment houses would be reluctant to loan money or raise funds for such a raider. Ventres said the New York-based company knew of no takeover attempt, and that Borden already has a poison pill plan designed to fend off an unwanted suitor. Instead, he told reporters at a news conference, the new plan was devised to ensure that if such an attempt were made, Borden stockholders would receive what the company considers a fair price. To determine that price, the company first would calculate its value through traditional methods, such as analyzing cash flow and market share. To that figure would be added at least half of the ``strategic'' value that a raider could obtain by breaking up the company, consolidating production and other efficiencies obtained after takeovers, he said. An alternate way of determining ``fair'' value would be if the takeover offer would result in the cash purchase of 85 percent of Borden's ``disinterested'' shares _ those not already held by the purchaser, Borden's directors or top management. If a raider failed to meet either one of those tests, the ``people plan'' would go into effect. Under that plan, if any one of the top 25 Borden managers were dismissed after a takeover without cause, all 25 would leave the company. In other words, if a raider took over Borden at less than the ``fair'' price, and then tried to sell off one of Borden's divisions, the head of that division would be considered dismissed without cause, and the 24 other top executives would tender resignations. The agreements with the 25 would be in force for three years after a takeover. ``In effect, if (a bidder) refused to pay our shareholders a fair price under this new standard, it would be difficult for him to restructure or sell off parts of the company for a period of three years,'' Ventres said. ``The moment he tried, he would lose the key operating management.'' Ventres said the 25 managers agreed to the plan because they have invested an average of 21 years in the company and want it to remain independent. They also received enhancements in their employment contracts, he said. Under their previous contracts, each would have received two to three years' pay upon termination after a takeover, depending on the number of years of service. Under the enhanced contracts, each would receive up to three years' pay. Each also would receive a stock option equal to his last stock option. Ventres said the total cost of the employment contracts, should they be terminated upon a hostile takeover and breakup, would range from $35 million in the first year of the three-year period, when each would receive three years' pay, to $10 million in the third year, when each would receive a minimum amount. He rejected characterizing the contracts as ``golden parachutes.'' He said they were standard employment contracts that were enhanced slightly under the new plan. John M. McMillin, a food industry analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., said the plan was unique, but questioned its effectiveness. ``It's not really going to stand in the way of an all-cash bid that the shareholders view as fair,'' he said. ``I just view it as another form of a poison pill, that might make Borden a little less vulnerable to a takevoer, but I stress the word little.'' He added that Borden did not seem a likely takover target for two reasons: Its management has done a good job boosting its stock price, and nearly 40 percent of its sales volume is in milk, a business in which a company has a hard time controlling the marketplace. Corporate raiders, he said, usually target companies that have a firm grip on their markets. ``It does show one thing about Borden: that there is a camaraderie of top managers,'' he said. ``They do emphasize the word team. They all socialize together. It's a real good environment.'' For 1987, Borden had a profit of $267 million on sales of $6.5 billion; it estimates its sales last year rose to $7.2 billion. The company is a leader in the dairy, snack food, pasta, grocery products, wall covering, forest product resins and packaging-films fields. 
If you ever wonder why so much borrowed money can go into leveraged buyouts at such high interest rates, consider this: Most of it is tax-deductible. And if you wonder why Americans don't save more, consider that interest earned, even on piddling savings accounts at modest rates, is subject to income taxes. Take the idea a step further: Untaxed money for leveraged buyouts tends to push up interest rates, simply because borrowers will pay higher rates; moreover, such borrowing may diminish funds available for more productive corporate uses. Meanwhile, taxes on interesta connecting hub at Tokyo's Narita Airport. It flies nonstop to Tokyo from Los Angeles, San Francisco, Honolulu and New York's Kennedy Airport. ``Although O'Hare is the world's busiest airport, the Chicago metropolitan area is unable to take advantage of the growing markets of air transportation to Asia,'' Wolf said. ``The situation is unfair to the Chicago area and runs contrary to the interests of the United States,'' he said. Under United's proposal, it would fly nonstop from Chicago to Tokyo, and then on to Seoul, South Korea, Nagin said. 
More than 700 cars and trucks went on display Wednesday at the North American Automobile Show, and if the new models are any indication, the cars of the '90s will have a decidedly wind-swept look. The newly renamed Detroit Auto Show began two days of media previews with the introduction of a new luxury car line from Japan, a new domestic minivan and questions about whether the nameplate of another Japanese entry in the high-priced car niche will be covered up in a trademark dispute. Also at the show, General Motors Corp. Chairman Roger Smith said the world's largest automaker expected to post a record profit for 1988, though he declined to give a figure. GM's previous record year was 1984, when the automaker posted earnings of $4.52 billion on sales of $83.89 billion. For 1987, GM had a profit of $3.55 billion on revenue of $101.78 billion. Smith also predicted the Big Three _ GM, Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. _ would earn a record $11 billion in 1988, though he did not break it down by company. The 700,000 square feet of Cobo Hall lit up with neon, videos and presentations to show off the products of 41 automakers. Gleaming new cars turned slowly on display platforms as models practiced their speeches. Dancers warmed up at the Toyota exhibit, smoke poured from a Dodge truck display and workers put finishing touches on carpeting as reporters and company executives wandered by. The show, which opens to the public Saturday, is used to introduce new models and to gauge public interest to futuristic ``concept'' cars. The common denominator for the hundreds of cars on display is smooth lines. Some say the streamlined look, which clicked at Ford Motor Co. with the Taurus and Sable models in 1983, is firmly entrenched in automobiles and light trucks. GM showed off its ``Multi Purpose Vehicle,'' or minivan, for 1990 that it will market through its Chevrolet, Oldsmobile and Pontiac dealers. Meanwhile, high-priced cars for the 1990s are getting a boost at the show. Nissan Motor Corp. officials unveiled three cars from its new Infiniti line _ a two-door coupe and convertible and a four-door sedan. The cars, expected to be in Infiniti dealer showrooms in a year, will range in price from about $22,000 to $40,000. The cars are targeted at West German luxury performance cars made by BMW and Mercedes-Benz that often are favored by the 35- to 54-year-old buyer on the way up the financial ladder. ``The first aim is the large base of Japanese owners who are moving up in the 1990s,'' said Infiniti General Manager William Bruce. He declined to predict sales of the cars other than to say they are expected to be modest. About 100 dealers have been signed up to carry the cars, which will be marketed separately from Nissan cars and trucks. Toyota Motor Corp. has scheduled an introduction of its Lexus luxury car line for Thursday, but a lawsuit filed by Mead Data Central Inc. could mar the car's unveiling. Mead claims the Lexus names infringes on the trademark for one of its computer data-base services, Lexis. A federal judge in New York last week issued a restraining order barring Toyota from using the Lexus name, but an appeals court stayed that order. A hearing on extending the stay is scheduled for Thursday in New York. The Lexus name appears 29 times on signs and cars at the company's display at the auto show. Toyota spokesman Kurt Von Zumwalt said arrangements have been made to cover the names if the injunction goes into effect. 
Stock prices staged a sharp rally Wednesday, rebounding from the losses they suffered in the first session of 1989. The Dow Jones average of 30 industrials, down 23.93 on Tuesday, climbed 33.04 points to 2,177.68. Advancing issues outnumbered declines by more than 3 to 1 in nationwide trading of New York Stock Exchange-listed stocks, with 1,187 up, 331 down and 455 unchanged. Volume on the floor of the Big Board came to 149.70 million shares, up from 128.50 million in the previous session. Nationwide, consolidated volume in NYSE-listed issues, including trades in those stocks on regional exchanges and in the over-the-counter market, totaled 176.03 million shares. The dollar rose in foreign-exchange trading, reversing its decline Tuesday. Analysts said traders bid the dollar up amid the uncertainty raised by news that U.S. planes shot down two Libyan fighter jets over the Mediterranean Sea. But demand for stocks was limited, brokers said, by caution in advance of Friday's report from the government on the employment situation for December. If the data show strong growth in payroll employment, many Wall Streeters believe the Federal Reserve would be more likely to tighten credit further in its campaign to keep inflation from flaring up again. In the auto group, General Motors gained 1| to 83~; Chrysler 1\ to 26}, and Ford Motor } to 51[. Roger Smith, GM's chairman, said preliminary indications point to record earnings for the company for 1988. Big-name technology issues also were strong. International Business Machines rose 1{ to 122{; Hewlett-Packard 1| to 53~, and Digital Equipment 1} to 100\. Elsewhere among the blue chips, Exxon added } to 44; General Electric } to 44}; Coca-Cola 1[ to 44|; Philip Morris 1[ to 102, and Procter &amp; Gamble ~ to 85]. Federal Express rose 3\ to 53| and Emery Air Freight { to 5| on word that a prime competitor in the express shipping business, United Parcel Service of America, was seeking rate increases for several of its services. Freeport-McMoRan jumped 2] to 30]. The company's directors voted an increase in the quarterly dividend and special extra payouts of 25 cents a share through the third quarter of 1990. Integrated Device Technology dropped 1[ to 10| in the over-the-counter market. The company estimated lower earnings for its ``disappointing'' third fiscal quarter ended Jan. 1. As measured by Wilshire Associates' index of more than 5,000 actively traded stocks, the market increased $34.38 billion, or 1.26 percent, in value. The NYSE's composite index of all its listed common stocks gained 2.08 to 157.06. Standard &amp; Poor's industrial index rose 4.78 to 323.44, and S&amp;P's 500-stock composite index was up 4.12 at 279.43. The NASDAQ composite index for the over-the-counter market gained 4.20 to 382.94. At the American Stock Exchange, the market value index closed at 307.77, up 2.53. 
Copper futures prices rose sharply Wednesday on New York's Commodity Exchange on supply worries rekindled by the apparent bombing of three locomotives in Peru and a decline in the exchange's warehouse stocks of copper. On other markets, precious metals futures retreated; grain and soybean futures surged; energy futures were mixed; cattle futures rose while pork futures fell; and stock-index futures advanced. Copper settled 3.1 cents to 6.3 cents higher with the spot contract at $1.58 a pound and the more actively traded contract for delivery in March at $1.426 a pound. The bombing of the locomotives in Peru, the world's sixth-largest copper producer, served to remind traders that the settlement last month of a 57-day Peruvian miners' strike did not defuse the country's internal political tensions or the potential for disruptions in the copper pipeline. Although no copper was lost in the explosions, ``the issue is that it will impede shipments of metals, including copper, to the ports,'' said Bette Raptopoulos, a metals analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in New York. Meanwhile, the Commodity Exchange reported a 301-ton decline in its warehouse stocks of copper to 7,964 tons. It was the first daily decline after more than a week of steady or rising supplies, indicating that copper consumers have returned to the marketplace after a holiday break, Ms. Raptopoulos said. Finally, copper for March delivery broke through strong resistance at $1.40 a pound, which prompted heavy buying by speculators who trade based on chart signals. The contract's close at $1.426 a pound was viewed as another bullish technical signal, said Craig Sloane, an analyst with Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co. ``The market's been in consolidation for more than a month and we may be breaking out of it to the upside,'' he said. ``The market has the potential here for a significant move. If it can just move a little higher, you could easily be in the $1.50 to $1.60 area.'' Copper futures hit an all-time high of $1.6475 a pound on Dec. 8. Precious metals prices fell on the Comex in response to the dollar's strength, which was in turn a reaction to the U.S. downing of two Libyan fighter planes off the Libyan coast, analysts said. Gold settled $2.30 to $2.40 lower with February at $411 a troy ounce; silver was 8.6 cents to 9.6 cents lower with March at $6.025 a troy ounce. Grain and soybean futures finished sharply higher on the Chicago Board of Trade amid reports and rumors of new export business. Wheat for near-month delivery surged to a 7{-year high above $4.47 a bushel on news that China had bought 440,000 metric tons of U.S. wheat at subsidized prices, analysts said. Near-month soybeans climbed more than 14 cents a bushel to their highest close since Oct. 5 on rumors that the Chinese were seeking to buy as much as 1 million metric tons of U.S. soybeans. And corn futures climbed substantially on rumors, later confirmed by the Agriculture Department, that the Soviet Union had purchased 250,000 metric tons of U.S. corn. ``Wheat's an export-driven market as you get into the latter part of the season and with exports being such as they are, almost on a par with last year, that speaks very well of that market,'' said grain-market analyst Arthur Parrish of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. in New York. Wheat settled 4 cents to 8 cents higher with March at $4.47\ a bushel; corn was 2} cents to 5{ cents higher with March at $2.83{ a bushel; oats were \ cent to 1{ cents higher with March at $2.45{ a bushel; soybeans were 7 cents to 14\ cents higher with January at $8.16 a bushel. In energy futures trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange, West Texas Intermediate crude oil settled 3 cents to 28 cents lower with February at $17.08 a barrel; heating oil was .58 cent to .81 cent lower with February at 52.65 cents a gallon; unleaded gasoline was .20 cent lower to .12 cent higher with February at 47.32 cents a gallon. On the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, live cattle settled .10 cent to .75 cent lower with February at 73.42 cents a pound; feeder cattle were .15 cent to .53 cent lower with January at 84.15 cents a pound; hogs were .18 cent lower to .32 cent higher with February at 46.47 cents a pound; frozen pork bellies were .20 cent to 1.03 cents higher with February at 43.45 cents a pound. Stock-index futures advanced sharply on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, where the contract for March delivery of the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index settled 5.25 points higher at 282.90. Each point is worth $500. 
The dollar advanced against most major currencies Wednesday in moderate trading, bolstered by tension in the Mediterranean and market expectations of strong U.S. employment data. Gold prices declined. Republic National Bank of New York quoted a late bid of $408.50 for a troy ounce of gold, up from $411 late Tuesday. On the Commodity Exchange in NewYork, a troy ounce of gold fell to $408.70 from $410.80 on Tuesday. Currency dealers said the dollar rose on news that U.S. fighter planes shot down two Libyan fighters over the Mediterranean. The U.S. currency is regarded as a safe haven in times of international tension. ``The dollar did snap back quite a bit,'' said Robert Hatcher, vice president of corporate foreign exchange in the New York office of Britain's Barclays Bank PLC. He described the dollar buying as a ``flight to quality'' prompted by the incident in the Mediterranean. In addition, many traders are said to be expecting Friday's government report on unemployment for December to show strong job growth. Such a showing could prompt the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates to rein in growth, a move which would boost the dollar, analysts said. Before European markets opened, the dollar fell in Tokyo against the Japanese yen on the first day of trading there after the New Year holiday. Dealers in Tokyo said there was massive selling of dollars after excessive buying at the end of 1988. The dollar closed in Tokyo at 124.05 Japanese yen, down from Friday's 125.90 yen before the holiday. In London late Wednesday the dollar traded higher at 124.95 yen. By the end of trading in New York, the dollar was quoted at 124.97 yen, up from 123.82 yen late Tuesday. The dollar's fall in Tokyo didn't seem to affect dealing in Europe, where the U.S. currency rose after the opening on the heels of a large number of commercial orders and expectations of higher interest rates. The dollar also gained against the British pound, which lost its two cent gain of Tuesday, dropping back to $1.8065 from $1.8270. In late New York trading a pound was worth $1.8090, cheaper than $1.8225 late Tuesday. Other late dollar rates in New York, compared with Tuesday's late rates, included: 1.7875 West German marks, up from 1.7670; 1.5282 Swiss francs, up from 1.4907; 6.0910 French francs, up from 6.0340; 1,314.50 Italian lire, up from 1,300.50; and 1.1925 Canadian dollars, up from 1.1916. Other late rates in Europe, compared with Tuesday's late rates, included: 1.7875 West German marks, up from 1.7620; 1.5180 Swiss francs, up from 1.4912; 6.0985 French francs, up from 6.0125; 2.0140 Dutch guilders, up from 1.9870; 1,313.00 Italian lire, up from 1,295.75; 1.1927 Canadian dollars, up from 1.1900. Gold closed in London, the major market, at a bid price of $409.75 a troy ounce, down from $411.75 late Tuesday. The close in Zurich, Switzerland, was $409.40 bid, down from $411.25. Earlier in Hong Kong, gold closed at $412.16 bid, down from $414.11. Silver bullion traded late in London at $6.01 bid a troy ounce, down from $6.07. On New York's Commodity Exchange, silver for current delivery closed at $5.937, down from $6.023 late Tuesday. 
Wall Street giant Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. has paid a $156,334 penalty for failing to register two mutual funds with Illinois officials before selling shares in the state, the government said Wednesday. Secretary of State Jim Edgar, whose office regulates securities dealers in Illinois, said he believes the penalty is the largest ever assessed in the state for failure to register mutual funds. Edgar said the case isn't connected to the federal investigation of Drexel in New York, where the firm is based. On Dec. 21 Drexel agreed to pay the U.S. government a record $650 million in fines and restitution and plead guilty to six felonies to settle a massive securities fraud case. An investigation by the securities department of Edgar's office found that shares in the funds worth more than $205 million were sold to Illinois residents by the firm beginning in April 1987. The penalty was calculated on the basis of $106,334 in management fees earned by the company while the shares were being sold illegally. The remaining $50,000 is a grant from Drexel to the Investor Protection and Education Program administered by the securities department. Since paying the penalty, the firm has registered the mutual funds, and shares can now be sold legally in Illinois, Edgar said. 
Nissan Motor Corp. is putting up some stiffer-than-usual dealer requirements for its new Infiniti car line, and much of it has to do with money. Infiniti General Manager William Bruce said Wednesday that it would take between $2.5 million and $5 million, depending on land cost, for a business person to set up an Infiniti franchise. That, according to the National Automobile Dealers Association, is about twice the typical start-up cost for getting into the automobile-selling business. Bruce also said each of the 100 or so dealers who have signed letters of intent to handle the new Japan-made luxury car are being told that their businesses must conform to certain architectural and space requirements. Just four cars will be displayed at a time, he said, each with a viewing area separated from the others by Japanese screens. The cars will be shown on stone floors instead of carpet or tile usually seen in dealerships. And there won't be any bright displays. ``When you walk into a showroom, you aren't attracted by an orange backlit thing,'' he said. Despite the restrictions, Bruce said the company has been swamped with applications from potential dealers. ``We stopped counting at 1,500 applications'' in the fall of 1987, he said. Between 60 percent and 65 percent of those who have signed letters of intent are Nissan dealers now, he said. And the majority of them are ``megadealers'' _ businesses that own two or more showrooms. Typically, megadealers have the cash or the credit needed to finance expensive projects, like an Infiniti dealership. ``The overwhelming majority are megadealers _ in the 80 percent range,'' he said. Part of the reason for requiring that Infiniti dealership locations be separate from Nissan dealerships, Bruce said, is to help identify the luxury car division as a different kind of dealership. ``We at Infiniti will differentiate ourselves from Nissan a lot,'' he said. ``We will not be looked at as an extension'' of Nissan. The cars certainly are different. When the two Infiniti models _ a coupe and a four-door sedan _ are in showrooms in about a year, they will range in price from about $22,000 to $40,000. Bruce said firmer prices will be announced later and could change depending on the relationship of the Japanese yen and the dollar. 
The heads of the top non-profit science and higher education associations in the nation's capital make salaries well into six figures, according to a new report. The Science &amp; Government Report, a newsletter, obtained the 1987 salary data from a number of non-profit groups by taking advantage of new, easier access to the tax returns of tax-exempt organizations. It found that the president of the National Academy of Sciences, Frank Press, drew a salary of $189,969 in 1987, plus $29,612 and a chauffeur-driven car. The academy is chartered by Congress as an adviser to the government. Although officially private, more than three-quarters of its $123 million in income came from government grants and contracts. Two related organizations also pay well: Robert M. White, as president of the National Academy of Engineering, earned $193,366, plus $15,406 in benefits, and Samuel Thier, president of the Institute of Medicine, was paid $167,764, plus $21,021 in benefits. The pacesetter among science and higher education groups was the Association of American Medical Colleges, which paid its president, Robert Petersdorf, $250,000 plus $25,000 in benefits for fiscal 1988. The American Chemical Society paid its executive director, John A. Krum, $160,400 in 1987, plus $8,501 for pension and $13,196 in benefits. The American Association for the Advancement of Science paid its executive director, Alvin Trivelpiece, $96,026, plus $11,166 in benefits, in 1987. Trivilpiece recently left to become director of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The Association of American Universities, which represents 56 major research universities, paid president Robert M. Rosenzweig $124,000 plus $23,445 in benefits in 1987. The American Council on Education, the main higher education lobby with 1,450 colleges and universities as members, paid president Robert H. Atwell $115,000 plus $31,092 in benefits for 1987. The National Association of State Universities and Land Grant Colleges paid Robert Clodius, its president@treasurer, $110,000, plus $16,500 in benefits. The data appeared in the Dec. 15 issue of Science &amp; Government Report. 
Corporate takeover activity in the United States hit a record 3,310 completed transactions worth $282.4 billion last year, a leading financial information service reported Wednesday. Statistics compiled by IDD Information Services showed the 1988 level of takeover action rose 28.6 percent over the 1987 level and 14.3 percent over the $247.1 billion in transactions completed in 1986, the previous record year. IDD statistics also showed foreign investors, encouraged by a weaker dollar, snapped up 325 U.S. companies valued at $54.8 billion, a 30 percent increase over the $42.3 billion spent in 1987. British companies spent $20.7 billion on American firms, while Japanese investors increased their buying activity by 1,000 percent, spending $10.4 billion on 35 acquisitions in the United States. Canada was the third most active foreign country in the U.S. takeover market, buying 50 American companies valued at $9.9 billion. Leveraged buyout activity remained strong despite predictions of a slowdown in this debt-financed takeover tactic, IDD said. In a leveraged buyout, or LBO, a buyer borrows most of the purchase money and pledges as collateral the target company's assets, earnings or a combination of both. IDD said 119 LBOs were completed in 1988 with a value of $37.7 billion. In addition, IDD said 165 LBOs worth $80.4 billion, including the record $25 billion deal for RJR Nabisco Inc., were announced during the year, suggesting 1989 will be an active year as well. The value of successful tender offers for public companies increased to $107.2 billion, nearly 70 percent higher than the $63.5 billion in completed tender offers in 1987, IDD said. The success rate of hostile takeovers in 1988 also rose, with 30.3 percent of all unfriendly bids announced in 1988 completed. In 1987, 24.8 percent of hostile offers announced in the year were successful. IDD said 32 rejected takeover offers were eventually completed in 1988, valued at $53.3 billion, vs. 22 such offers with a value of $6.1 billion in 1987. Based in New York, IDD is a leading financial information and publication concern that primarily supplies figures to the investment banking business. 
Mediated contract talks between Northwest Airlines and its pilots union began in earnest Wednesday, a company spokesman said. Northwest officials and leaders of the Air Lines Pilots Association met at an undisclosed location in the Twin Cities with federal mediator Robert Brown, said Northwest spokesman Kevin Whalen. Whalen said company and union representatives will meet jointly with the mediator at least two days every week this month. In addition, he said, both sides will likely meet separately with the mediator. The talks are expected to last several months, Whalen said. The union representing 4,800 pilots and the airline were millions of dollars apart when Northwest requested mediation in mid-November. The call for mediation temporarily ended the union's strike threat. The pilots had voted overwhelmingly to walk off their jobs, but said they would abide by laws that make a strike illegal during mediation. The airline and the union are negotiating for a combined contract covering 2,800 pre-merger Northwest pilots and 2,000 former Republic Airlines pilots. The two pilot groups have been working under separate contracts since Northwest's acquisition of Republic in 1986. There are differences over wages, work schedules, fringe benefits and length of contract. 
General Motors Corp. will set an earnings record in 1988, surpassing the $4.5 billion the nation's largest automaker made in 1984, Chairman Roger Smith said Wednesday. ``Now, we haven't added up all of the figures, but we've added up enough of them that I can tell you right now that GM's net income for the 1988 calendar year is going to be an all-time record,'' Smith said. ``And not only that, we are going into 1989 in great shape because we have the lowest year-end stock levels of passenger cars on hand in the field since 1984,'' he said. ``So 1988 was a great year (and) 1989 is going to be another good one.'' Smith, meeting with reporters during a media preview of the North American International Auto Show, declined to estimate the corporation's 1988 earnings. GM, Ford Motor Co. and Chrysler Corp. were expected to report their 1988 earnings at the end of January. Industry officials and analysts have speculated that 1988 earnings by the Big Three automakers could reach a record total of about $11 billion. Smith also said he expected GM's market share would increase in 1989. But he refused to estimate what portion of the market the corporation would command. GM announced Dec. 12 that its anticipated 1988 earnings would allow it to make profit sharing payments for the first time since 1985. Profit sharing, estimated at nearly $900 million, would come out to about $200 for a typical employee who worked the entire year, the automaker said. For the first three quarters of 1988 ending Sept. 30, GM reported earnings of $3.46 billion on sales and revenues of $81.38 billion from its worldwide operations. 
General Motors Corp.'s Chevrolet and Buick divisions announced new rebates Wednesday ranging from $300 to $1,000 on certain 1989 and 1988 models. The rebates take effect Thursday and end Feb. 28 for Chevrolet customers and March 2 for Buick customers, the divisions said in separate statements. Chevrolet will offer a $1,000 rebate on the four-cylinder Celebrity; $600 on the six-cylinder Celebrity and Spectrum with manual transmission; $400 on Corsica, Beretta, Sprint and Spectrum with automatic transmission; and $300 on Cavalier models. All Chevrolets covered by the rebates are 1989 models with the exception of the 1988 Sprint. Buick will offer a $750 rebate on the Electra and Park Avenue; $500 on the Regal and Skylark; and $400 on the Century and LeSabre. The rebates cover both 1988 and 1989 Regals and 1989 models of all other lines. 
A group of Japanese investors announced it had bought a small movie production studio in Los Angeles, and, with a $50 million investment, intends to make six films over the next three years. The new studio, Apricot Entertainment Inc., has been refurbishing a two-soundstage studio in Hollywood for a month. The project was announced Wednesday. Apricot Entertainment is headed by Naofumi Okamoto, a former director of business development with FujiSankei Communications International of Japan whose job it was to buy movies for cable television use in Japan. Apricot (the name is taken from a feature of Okamoto's family crest) said its first movie would be ``The Crysanthemum Covenant,'' a World War II drama conceived by Okamoto. The company said it plans to spend $6 million per movie, a small amount by Hollywood standards. 
Great Northern Nekoosa Corp. announced Wednesday a $500 million expansion of its paper mill at Ashdown, the biggest industrial expansion ever announced in Arkansas. The expansion will add a fourth paper machine to the mill, which will be the largest fine paper machine in the world, Nekoosa executives said at a news conference with Gov. Bill Clinton. When the machine is running, it will generate a sheet of paper 30 feet wide and one mile long every 1{ minutes, said Pete Howard, vice president for manufacturing. The machine will be 125 yards long, Howard said. The machine will have the capacity to produce 325,000 tons of finished fine paper per year, Nekoosa officials said, raising Ashdow's capacity to 800,000 tons per year. The second-largest fine paper machine will be the Georgia-Pacific Corp. machine at Port Hudson, La., Nekoosa said. Fine paper includes copy machine paper, envelopes, form bond, and paper for offset printing. The company's board of directors unanimously approved the project at a meeting in New York earlier in the day, the Nekoosa executives said. It was one of three projects put before the board. The executives recommended the one the board approved. The expansion will result in 2,000 construction jobs to build the machine, starting this year and completing work by 1991, and 250 permanent jobs, raising the mill's employment to 1,500 by 1991, said William R. Laidig, chief executive of Nekoosa. Nekoosa president Arnold M. Nemirow credited Arkansas' investment tax credit law, the business climate of Arkansas under Clinton's leadership, and economic considerations at Nekoosa for the decision to expand in Arkansas. Nemirow said the company's tax credit will be $12 million to $14 million for this project. That was enough to be one of many factors considered by Nekoosa, he said, but not enough to be the sole basis for the decision. The company also has mills in Maine, Georgia, Mississippi, and Wisconsin. Clinton called it the largest industrial expansion ever announced in Arkansas and officials of the state Chamber of Commerce agreed with him. 
Earnings of the S&amp;P 500 companies rose 40 percent last year, but shareholders got dividend increases of only 11 percent, Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. said Wednesday. Companies harbored cash because even though they are racking up healthy profits, ``they are well aware that the 6-year-old economic expansion is due for a reverse,'' the credit-rating agency said in a news release. Although though the dividend increase was only a quarter of the profit increase, the 11 percent increase was still the biggest since 1979, Standard &amp; Poor's said. For 1989, Standard &amp; Poor's predicted slower economic growth, smaller gains in corporate profits and fewer and smaller dividend increases than last year. Among all U.S. companies, a total of 1,705 dividend increases were reported in 1988 to Standard &amp; Poor's, up 7 percent from the 1,590 reported in 1987. 
Turner Broadcasting System Inc. announced Wednesday it will transmit Cable News Network 24 hours a day to Latin American on Pan American Satellite's new international satellite, PAS 1. The agreement followed a series of tests that began on Election Day, Nov. 8, TBS said in a statement. Turner's decision to use Pan American Satellite is a victory for that private company and a defeat for Intelsat, the international consortium that operates most communications satellites. ``This marks the first time a major television organization has utilized an international satellite transponder on a non-Intelsat-operated satellite to distribute programs,'' said Terence F. McGuirk, president of Turner Cable Network Sales, who executed the agreement for TBS. The PAS 1 satellite provides a wide range of communications services to all of Latin America, the Caribbean and Europe. CNN also announced this week it will open its first permanent South American bureau in Santiago, Chile, during 1989. The network currently has 20 foreign bureaus and plans to open seven more before the end of the year, TBS said in the statement. 
Oldsmobile entered the crowded multipurpose vehicle field Wednesday, rolling out its Silhouette multi-purpose vehicle at Detroit's annual auto show. Two other General Motors Corp. subsidiaries _ Chevrolet and Pontiac _ also unveiled aerodynamic-styled vans for 1990. Chevrolet General Manager Bob Burger said meanwhile that Chevy's new Lumina sedan, which will go into production this spring for the 1990 model year, will be the car upon which GM's future success depends. ``We know that it's going to be a big hit because we've had it out there among the people who are going to buy it,'' he said. William Lane, Oldsmobile General manager, said the Silhouette utility vehicle will give Olds the chance to capitalize on the expansion of the market for minivans, started and led by Chrysler Corp. Burger said Chevrolet's Lumina, Oldsmobile's Silhouette, and the Pontiac Transport SE, which share frame design and windswept styling, will be built at the GM plant in Tarrytown, N.Y. Production during the 1990 model year of the GM minivans is expected to reach 100,000, rising to 225,000 a year subsequently as sales rise toward plant capacity. Pontiac General Manager Michael Losh predicted the minivan market would increase to 1 million units in the early 1990s from the current industry output of about 750,000 units a year. Chevrolet and Pontiac share the GM minivan production on a rough 65 percent to 35 percent basis, Burger said. Lane declined to speculate on what percentage Oldsmobile would garner in the new GM production. Burger said the split among Oldsmobile, Chevrolet and Pontiac would depend on how many vans each sells. Oldsmobile decided to enter the minivan business because 1.1 million customers switched from cars to light trucks in 1988, he said. ``Among those buyers who crossed over to the light truck market, 34 percent purchased a mid-sized van,'' he said. GM's was one of a host of briefings by the 41 exhibitors at the North American International Automobile Show, where more than 700 cars and trucks are on display. GM featured the three multi-purpose vehicles, or MPVs, the Lumina sedan, the Corvette ZR-1, the Pontiac Stinger and Oldsmobile Aerotech II. Like other concept cars, the Stinger, a beach-buggy type vehicle, and the Aerotech II, a four-passenger sports coupe for the highway, are exhibited for the manufacturer to measure consumer interest in design and performance characteristics. 
Quaker Oats Co. said Wednesday it plans to sell its Ghirardelli Chocolate business, which Quaker acquired in 1986 as part of its purchase of the Golden Grain Co. The Chicago-based Quaker said no specific buyer has been identified for the famous chocolate concern, which is based in San Leandro. But Quaker said it has been approached by many interested potential buyers of Ghirardelli since it was acquired. Ghirardelli, which was founded before the Civil War, is profitable but is too small for Quaker Oats, said Douglas W. Mills, executive vice president of Quaker's diversified grocery products division. He said Ghirardelli ``does not ideally fit with our existing businesses and strategies.'' ``In our view, Ghirardelli has a great deal of upseide potantial, but with an owner whose priorities are more focused on the chocolate business and specialty retailing,'' Mills said. He said Quaker was principally interested in the side-dish brands of Rice-A-Roni and Noodle-Roni when it acquired Golden Grain. He noted the chocolate company represented only 12 percent of Golden Grain's sales volume. Ghirardelli, founded in 1852, originally made powdered chocolate. Around the turn of the century, the company bought a square block above what is now Aquatic Park, on the edge of San Francisco Bay. That property became Ghirardelli Square when that tourist attraction was opened in 1966. The chocolate company operates the Ghirardelli Chocolate Shop and Soda Fountain, and an ice scream shop, at the site. 
The government plans price increases of 20 percent in 1989 and hopes to hold inflation to just over 50 percent, compared to 70-80 percent in 1988, Deputy Premier Ireneusz Sekula announced Wednesday. Sekula told a news conference wages will be allowed to rise generally in relation to rising prices, but the government will use a penalty tax to discourage pay increases it considers inflationary. He said price increases announced last year would produce a basic inflation of more than 30 percent in 1989 even if the government did not raise prices this year. By adding that figure to the planned 20 percent increase in prices in 1989, the government sees overall inflation exceeding 50 percent, he said. ``This is a clear decrease in inflation, though unfortunately, still substantial,'' Sekula said. Prices for basic foods will rise by 12 percent while other goods will go up at a steeper pace, he said. He said the government plans to stagger the increases throughout the year. Telephone rates, for example, went up 40 percent on Jan. 1. Price increases are a politically sensitive issue in Poland. Increases set off worker revolts that led to the removal of governments in 1956, 1970, 1980 and most recently last year, when Zbigniew Messner stepped down as prime minister under widespread criticism of his handling of the economy. Sekula said the government had to allow for a 1 trillion zloty ($2 billion) budget deficit in 1989 to avoid higher price increases. He said limiting price rises to 20 percent means the government must raise subsidies on many goods, adding that such subsidies will account for more than 30 percent of the budget. 
A Japanese real-estate company is close to buying the world's tallest building for at least $1.2 billion, a Los Angeles firm representing the prospective buyer said Wednesday, but the skyscraper's present owner said it wasn't involved in any sale negotiations. Sears, Roebuck and Co., which put the famed 110-story Sears Tower up for sale on Oct. 31, said speculation that a Japanese buyer was close to a deal was groundless. ``We are compiling a financial analysis, which is the first step in the offering process,'' Sears said in a statement. ``We are not involved in any negotiations at this time.'' The 14-year-old structure, which rises 1,450 feet above the downtown Loop, is expected to fetch a record price for a U.S. building, surpassing the $660 million paid by Walter Shorenstein in 1985 for the Bank of America Building in San Francisco. Sears has said it is selling the tower as part of the giant retailer's previously announced restructuring plan, but intends to keep its corporate headquarters in the building. Jack Barthell, managing partner of Kenneth Leventhal &amp; Co. of Los Angeles, said the prospective buyer was a Japanese real-estate firm that owns high-profile buildings in other cities and already has ``a presence in Chicago.'' His description prompted speculation that the client was Shuwa Corp., a Japanese real estate developer with more than $2 billion in U.S. holdings, including ABC's New York headquarters, the Arco Plaza in downtown Los Angeles and the Quaker Oats Tower in Chicago. Scott Tagliarino, a spokesman in Los Angeles for Shuwa Investment Corp., a Shuwa affiliate, said: ``The company generally doesn't comment on those things. Essentially, there's no comment.'' Barthell's statements drew a doubtful reaction from Cushman &amp; Wakefield Inc., a New York-based real-estate firm that has represented Japanese buyers in other large commercial property transactions. ``I find it hard to believe that one client would risk $1.2 billion in one place on one property,'' said John Oharenko, managing partner of Cushman &amp; Wakefield's Chicago office. ``The deal is so large that you would probably have to have more than one source of capital.'' Oharenko said the cash-rich Japanese likely would be involved in buying the Sears Tower, but probably in conjunction with a U.S. firm. Direct Japanese investment in U.S. commercial real estate in the past two years has totaled more than $15 billion, said Martin Sawa, senior investment specialist in Cushman &amp; Wakefield's San Francisco office. The sharp rise in Japanese purchases of top U.S. commercial property in recent years _ a phenomenon linked partly to the weak dollar _ has incited a backlash of resentment that most Japanese firms would prefer to avoid, Oharenko said. Barthell said his unidentified client was sensitive to that situation but undeterred by it. ``They are a very good corporate citizen, very philanthropic, and they are known in the communities in which they do business as an outstanding community citizen and leader,'' Barthell said., ``I don't think they're put off by the profile and recognition that buying the Sears Tower might give them.'' 
Venezuelan President-elect Carlos Andres Perez said Wednesday he is confident there will be increased cooperation from the United States under George Bush in helping Latin America overcome its foreign debt burden. ``We will have the opportunity for great (American) cooperation with our countries in Latin America, great opportunities for development,'' said Perez, who recently had several meetings with the U.S. President-elect. Perez said Wednesday's visit with new Mexican president Carlos Salinas de Gortari is part of a effort by Latin American leaders to find a reasonable solution to the debt problem. ``We seek agreement among Latin American countries to find reasonable solutions with our creditors,'' Perez told reporters before speaking to Salinas. ``We seek agreement in search of an understanding and not confrontation.'' Venezuela on Saturday suspended payments on a large chunk of its $35 billion foreign debt, claiming it was short of money because of low prices for crude oil. Mexico is trying to renegotiate payments on its $106 billion debt, the second largest after Brazil among developing countries. Both nations say that debt payments are eating so much money that they don't have enough left for investment and economic growth. Perez and Salinas also discussed oil, a major source of foreign revenues for both nations. ``Our countries have suffered the buffeting of the fall in prices, but in my meeting with the president of Mexico, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, I expressed to him my optimism about the possibilities of a stablization of the petroleum market soon,'' Perez told a news conference Wednesday night before leaving the country. He also announced that this week he would travel to Brazil for a similar meeting with President Jose Sarney. Venezuela is a founding member of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, a 13-nation cartel that has faced trouble in bolstering prices. Mexico, the world's sixth largest exporter, is not a member of OPEC but follows the cartel's guidelines. About half the oil that Pemex, the Mexican state petroleum monopoly, sells abroad goes to the United States. Perez said if no solution is found to the debt problem, the severe economic difficulties currently afflicting Venezuela, Brazil and Mexico will extend to more countries. Perez said debt negotiations ``should be bilateral, but the countries should seek to strengthen our bargaining power through the establishment of a single Latin American position.'' ``I don't want to turn into a lawyer for the banks, but the banks are tied by the policies established by the (U.S.) Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve ... and that is why it is essential that we ask the U.S. government to change its attitude,'' Perez said. Perez said he was optimistic OPEC will be able to keep prices from falling further, but he described the debt as ``a vise on the economy'' of Venezuela. 
O. Clara Sager, a popular eccentric who loved cats and insisted on living atop a pile of trash outside her house, died after being hospitalized for exposure. She was 91. Sager, known to her neighbors as the ``Cat Lady,'' was taken by ambulance to Yolo General Hospital here Tuesday morning. When she was admitted, her body temperature was 84 degrees and she was suffering from hypothermia, said Yolo County Deputy Coroner William Long. Overnight temperatures have dropped into the 20s and 30s in recent weeks. Despite the chill, Sager continued to stay where she has for decades _ outside the front of her house in nearby Winters on a tarpaulin-covered pile of trash, protected by an umbrella. The Rev. John Reimers, pastor of the Pioneer Presbyterian Church, said he has known Sager for 25 years. ``She chose her lifestyle and lived it to the end,'' Reimers said. The minister said Sager had been ill for 10 days and had been taking medication. He and other neighbors in Winters, a town of 2,650 about 20 miles west of Sacramento, were concerned about her welfare; they called a doctor Tuesday after she became confused. ``She kept telling us she was better. Her hands were not cold,'' he said. Now Reimers said he must find homes for Sager's 16 cats. Some were said to be strays people had abandoned hoping the ``Cat Lady'' would care for them. ``We'll have to make some decisions concerning them. Clara won't be there to feed them twice a day,'' he said. Reimers described Sager as a collector and an avid reader of newspapers who was interested in civic affairs. She sang in his church's choir and participated in its women's groups until arthritis made it difficult for her to walk. Inside her house were 1,200 books, enough furniture for several houses and many pretty glass items such as vases, he said. ``Many tried to get her to change her style of living. She pointed out that Indians lived outside all the time,'' Reimers said. 
Director Steven Spielberg, a long-time lover of animated cartoons, is joining forces with Warner Bros. for a new television version of Warner's famous ``Merrie Melodies,'' to be called ``Tiny Tunes.'' ``These will be offspring of the famous Warner Bros. cartoons, such as Bugs Bunny, Porky Pig and Sylvester the Cat,'' Spielberg said at a news conference Wednesday. ``But I don't know if they will be actually sons and daughters. I'm not quite sure how reproduction works in `Tunes.' '' ``Tiny Tunes'' will be produced jointly by Spielberg and Warner Bros. and will be distributed for syndicated television by Lorimar Telepictures Corp. for the fall season of 1990. The initial order under the two-year contract is for 65 episodes. Terry Semel, president and chief operating officer of Warner Bros. Inc., said the project had been in development for several years with Spielberg, who has produced such animated features as ``An American Tail'' and ``Who Framed Roger Rabbit.'' ``We at Warner's had been talking about doing something for a long time with our animated characters,'' Semel said. ``This young man kept popping in and out and telling us, `I want to do something with your cartoons.' That guy was Steven Spielberg.'' Spielberg said he can't draw or paint, but is a great admirer of cartoons, particularly from the 1930s and 1940s. ``My favorites were those from Warner Bros. because they were sassy and never took any guff from anybody,'' Spielberg said. ``Our characters will be derived from those cartoons. They're going to be tinier versions of Porky Pig and Sylvester and Tweety.'' Spielberg promised there would be no violence in the half-hour episodes, and that they wouldn't have the chase scenes that are a staple of many cartoon shows. 
Here are the winning weekly state lottery numbers picked Wednesday: 
Wednesday Megabucks: 05; 08; 20; 23; 33; 36. 
Wednesday Lotto 54 Game: 06; 14; 15; 41; 45; 51. Supplementary 2. 
Grand Lot Game: 6-2-0; 0-0-6-0; 2-4-4-9-7; 0-1-3-0-2-2. 
A new study suggests that women under 45 who use birth control pills face a greater risk of breast cancer _ a finding that contradicts earlier research. The study results were being presented today at a hearing of the Food and Drug Administration. Researchers at the Boston University School of Medicine found that women who used oral contraceptives had twice the risk of breast cancer compared to women who have never used the pill. For women who have used the pill for 10 years or more, the study found, the risk of breast cancer was four times greater. The issue is of particular concern because oral contraceptives are the most popular form of birth control in the United States, and breast cancer is the second most common fatal cancer in women. An estimated 13.2 million American women take birth control pills, according to the Alan Guttmacher Institute, which specializes in reproductive biology. About 42,000 women die of breast cancer each year, according to the American Cancer Society. The Boston University findings were based on a study of 407 women with breast cancer and a cancer-free control group of 424. All were patients in hospitals in Boston, New York, Philadelphia and Baltimore. Dr. Samuel Shapiro, director of the Slone Epidemiology Unit at Boston University, said in a news release the new study contradicts findings in earlier studies, which indicated there was no association between use of the pill and development of breast cancer. ``Whereas early studies, including our own, were reassuring about the use of oral contraceptives and the risk of breast cancer, recent studies reopen the question, but do not, by any means, answer it,'' said Shapiro. The effect of the new findings, the researchers said, is to show that further studies are needed ``to reconcile the different findings and to overcome the methodologic limitations of earlier ones.'' A recent study by Dr. Clifford R. Kay and Philip C. Hannaford of Manchester, England, found no overall increase in breast cancer among women who had taken birth control pills, but did find a threefold increase in breast cancers in women 30 to 34 years old who were former pill users. There was no elevation in breast cancer rates among women who were younger or older than this group. The Boston University researchers said it is possible the results of their study were biased and the association between oral contraceptives and breast cancer ``may not be one of cause and effect.'' Further details of the study were to be revealed at the FDA hearing and will be published next month in the American Journal of Epidemiology. Oral contraceptives are pills that generally contain a combination of the hormones estrogen and progestin. Usually taken daily for three weeks, the pills prevent conception by inhibiting ovulation. In recent years, the amount of hormone in each pill has generally been reduced as researchers learned that higher doses were unneeded to prevent conception. Side effects, some of them serious, have been experienced among some women taking the pill, but the accepted medical practice now is to prescribe the pill for healthy women until the age of 35. Women over that age, particularly smokers, who have used the pill for more than five years are known to be at greater risk for heart attack and stroke. 
Milwaukee is rolling out the guillotine, New York is showing what well-dressed nobility wore to the dungeon in 1789 and dozens of other American cities are planning hundreds of events to celebrate the bicentennial of the French Revolution. ``Americans love a party, they love a bicentennial and they love France. The French Revolution is a natural,'' said Christopher Henze, cultural attache at the U.S. Embassy in Paris. Henze is keeping track of more than 300 concerts, exhibits, symposiums, festivals, film series and TV shows taking place across the United States in 1989. Birmingham, Ala., alone has an events list nine pages long that includes ``Marcel Proust at the University of Alabama'' lectures, wine tastings, productions of Moliere's ``Tartuffe'' and cooking classes by a chef from Paris' famed Le Cordon Bleu. The French are enthusiastic about the American revolutionary fervor and have decided to send the original Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen to an exhibit at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington next spring. It will be the first time France's most precious document has been on display anywhere since it was locked away in 1791 when it was embodied as the preamble to the French constitution. The Declaration was drafted in 1789 by Emmanuel Sieyes, the French statesman and clergyman, and mirrored the ideas of the liberal Enlightenment. It spoke of the equality of men and the inalienable rights to security, liberty and property. The founding document of the French Republic will be flown across the Atlantic on April 18 on another source of French pride, the supersonic Concorde, which will be on view for a short while at the Smithsonian's Aerospace Museum. ``That a single small country like France can have itself represented by a beautiful jet like the Concorde and a document like the Declaration of the Rights of Man is incredible,'' said Sir Valentine Abdy, the Smithsonian's representative in Europe. He has arranged for a Concorde plane to be given to the Smithsonian when it goes out of service. French musicians and Americans of French ancestry will play on the Washington Mall June 30-July 4, at about the time the Smithsonian's New York branch, the Cooper-Hewitt Museum, is displaying the best objects from two centuries of French decorative art and design. The $2.5 million cost of the ``L'Art de Vivre'' exhibit is being paid by the French Comite Colbert, a group of luxury goods companies such as Krug Champagne and Hermes. Cartier jewelry will sparkle in museums in New Orleans, San Diego and elsewhere. The Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York will show fashions from ``The Age of Napolean: Costume From Revolution to Empire.'' Artist Gustave Corbet will be reconsidered at the Brooklyn Museum in an exhibit that will later travel to Minneapolis. And, for lovers of the printed word, The New York Public Library will offer the ``Revolution in Print,'' a collection of books, broadsides, prints, posters, manuscripts and periodicals, many on loan from the Bibliotheque Nationale. French dancers from the Paris Opera Ballet and other companies will pirouette across stages from North Carolina to Massachusetts. Daniel Barenboim will lead the Orchestre de Paris on a seven-city tour including stops in Chicago and at New York's Carnegie Hall. And French arias will resound in opera halls in Texas, California and Washingon, D.C. Keyboardist Ray Charles and saxophonist Dexter Gordon will swing with French jazzmen Claude Bolling and Claude Nougaro at Carnegie Hall in a concert series that will have other musicians jamming at Washington's Kennedy Center for the Arts, Chicago's Orchestra Hall and the Los Angeles' Universal Amphitheatre. What does jazz have to do with the French Revolution? ``Nothing. But it's a chance to celebrate the role of the French over several decades in giving black American musicians the right to work, the freedom to express themselves and the support of dedicated audiences,'' said Edward Tuck, who will produce a television show from the concerts and have interviews with musicians who have lived and worked in Paris. Such artists have have included the late composers and pianists Thelonius Monk and Bud Powell. Tuck, who is also president of the French-American Foundation, said the number and variety of U.S. celebrations reflect America's awareness that the French Revolution was the basis not only for the Declaration of Human Rights adopted Aug. 26, 1789, but also for the U.S. Bill of Rights, adopted 30 days later. ``And that is no coincidence,'' he said. ``Ideas ricocheted between the great thinkers of our two countries. It is the anniversary of a tradition that produced the common notion that a government is meant to defend the human rights that each individual is born with.'' Celebrations will crescendo on Bastille Day, July 14, when 200 years ago a mob stormed the prison for guns but found only seven prisoners instead. The day marked the beginning of lower-class participation in the revolution, which had been led by the bourgeoisie (middle class) against the aristocrats and the clergy. In Milwaukee, more than 200,000 people are expected to attend a four-day festival where food vendors will cook crepes and frog-legs kabobs to be washed down with champagne, ``or rather American bubbly white wine, because it's cheaper,'' said Betsy Kohler, who is coordinating the event. There will be a mock Arc de Triomphe constructed as the finish line for a midnight run, not to mention the ever-popular guillotine. ``We had one last year and everyone liked it,'' Kohler said. ``It's the kind of thing where someone puts their head in a hole and someone else takes their picture. Also, it's very nicely painted and has the history of the revolution printed on it. ``A lot of people are going to learn about the French Revolution this year.'' 
The French Revolution will be commemorated by dozens of cities throughout the United States in 1989. More than 300 events already are planned. Here is a partial list of events. A newsletter containing a more complete list can be obtained from the American Committee on the French Revolution, 1511 K Street N.W., 11th Floor, Washington, D.C. 20005. 
Exhibitions:  Brooklyn Museum, New York City Courbet Reconsidered Nov. 4, 1988 _ Jan. 16, 1989  New Orleans Museum of Art Cartier Jewels: The George and Frayda Lindemannn Collection Nov. 13, 1988 _ Feb. 12, 1989  New York Public Library Revolution in Print: France 1789 Feb. 18 _ May 13, 1989  Cooper-Hewitt Museum, New York City L'Art de Vivre: Decorative Arts and Design in France 1789-1989 March 29 _ July 1989  Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston. On the Passage of a Few People Through a Rather Brief Moment in Time: Situationists 1957-1972 Fall 1989  Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts, Philadelphia Paris 1889: American Artists at the World's Fair Fall 1989  Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York City The Age of Napoleon: Costume From Revolution to Empire Dec. 15, 1989 _ April 16, 1990  The Dallas Museum of Arts Memory of Mankind: Treasures of the Bibliotheque Nationale Oct. 1, 1989 _ Jan. 28, 1990 
 Festivals:  Galveston Mardi Gras, Texas Jan. 27 _ Feb. 7, 1989 Parades, balls, sporting events, exhibits and concerts on the Texas island celebrating the French Revolution.  Houston International Festival April 13-23, 1989 Includes the Houston Grand Opera production of ``The Dialogue of the Carmelites,'' a business conference on foreign investment and dozens of other events.  International Festival of Louisiana April 20-23, 1989 Singers, dancers and musicians from France and French-speaking countries, including Louisiana's own home-grown Cajun musicians and chefs.  Salute to France: Birmingham Festival of the Arts, Alabama April 21-30, 1989 Concerts, performances by the Alabama Ballet and much more, including an ``Ambassador's Weekend'' featuring a gala dinner. 
 Performing Arts:  Orchestre de Paris Tour Feb. 16-27, 1989 The tour will mark the last time Daniel Barenboim conducts the orchestra abroad as its music director. Consult local newspapers for dates of performances in New York City; New Haven, Conn.; New Brunswick, N.J.; Greenvale, N.Y.; Washington, D.C.; and Chicago.  ``1789'' _ Los Angeles Spring 1989, date to be announced An English language version of Mnouchkine's epic play, restaged and directed by Paul Verdier and produced in cooperation with the University of Southern California.  French and American Dance Today, Durham, N.C., and Jacob's Pillow, Tanglewood, Mass. June-July 1989 A festival of 10 contemporary French dance companies. The tour will visit other American cities, to be announced.  Bicentennial Music Festival, Hollywood Bowl, California July 11-15, 1989 A series of five concerts featuring guest artists in recital and concert with the Los Angeles Philharmonic. July 14-15 concerts will be followed by fireworks.  Wolf Trap Farm for the Performing Arts, Vienna, Va. July 14 Events throughout the summer season at Wolf Trap, including a special concert July 14 with guest starts to be announced.  The Pennsylvania Ballet, Philadelphia Academy of Music September 1989 A gala evening saluting the bicentennial with guest stars from the Paris Opera Ballet.  All That Jazz, New York City, Washington, D.C., Los Angeles Oct. 11: Carnegie Hall, New York Oct. 16: Kennedy Center, Washington Oct. 21: Universal Amphitheatre, Los Angeles 
 Film, Media and Special Events:  Cinema and the French Revolution, U.S. Tour January 1989 _ December 1989 A retrospective of rarely seen films organized by the University of California at Los Angeles in cooperation with the French Foreign Ministry and French Embassy. Films from the Cinematheque Francaise and other international archives will tour about 12 cities, including Houston; New York; Los Angeles; Boulder, Colo.; Minneapolis; San Francisco; Boston; Lincoln, Neb.; New Orleans; Atlanta; Chicago, and Iowa City, Iowa.  International Human Rights Video-Conference, Los Angeles May 1989, date to be announced A video-conference on human rights issues, organized by UCLA in cooperation with France Telecommunications. The discussion will take place live between two international panels at the Centre Georges Pompidou in Paris and UCLA in Los Angeles.  The French battleship Jean D'Arc will sail to the United States and Puerto Rico in 1989, calling in at the ports of Pearl Harbor, San Francisco, New Orleans and Puerto Rico where the ship will be open to the public. 
The family of a Belfast man held hostage in Beirut marked his 1,000th day in captivity with a vigil outside city hall. Brian Keenan, a teacher with dual British and Irish nationality, was kidnapped April 11, 1986 on his way to the American University in Beirut, where he had just begun to work. ``If we forget, the world forgets,'' said his sister, Brenda Gillham, who stood outside the city hall with three other family members during Wednesday's vigil. ``We must keep the fight going.'' She said the vigil was both for the family members and to ``ask governments: How many more days can a normal human being take? Maybe the governments will start to think about it.'' Keenan, 38, was using an Irish passport when he was abducted, but both the Irish and British governments are working toward his release. The British government also seeks the release of Anglican envoy Terry Waite and journalist John McCarthy. And it seeks word on Alec Collett, a New York-based British journalist whose Palestinian abductors claim they killed him. His body was never found. In all, 15 foreigners are missing in Lebanon and believed held hostage. They include nine Americans, among them Associated Press chief Middle East correspondent Terry Anderson, who was abducted on March 16, 1985. 
A former janitor serving a 35-year prison term for a murder that authorities now believe was committed by the so-called ``Southside Strangler'' was granted executive clemency Wednesday. David Vasquez' pardon was based in part on the recommendation of Arlington County Commonwealth's Attorney Helen Fahey, said Gov. Gerald L. Baliles. Vasquez, 42, pleaded guilty in 1985 to second-degree murder in the death of Washington lawyer Carolyn Jean Hamm of Arlington. Vasquez at first confessed to the killing, but recanted his confession and said he entered the guilty plea to avoid a possible capital murder conviction and death sentence. Vasquez has been imprisoned at Buckingham Correctional Center in Dillwyn. New evidence, a review of existing evidence, further investigation and analysis by the Arlington County Police Department and the FBI National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime convinced authorities that the crime was committed by Timothy Spencer, who has been convicted of capital murder in the deaths of Susan Tucker of Arlington and Debbie Davis of Richmond. Spencer's convictions were based on DNA tests, also known as ``genetic fingerprinting.'' In such tests, the molecular structure of body fluids and tissues from a crime scene are matched with those of the suspect. Like fingerprints, each structure is unique to the individual. After the murder of Ms. Tucker, Arlington police reconsidered whether Vasquez murdered Ms. Hamm. ``Every lead and available scientific process was pursued, and led to the conclusion that Spencer ... was responsible for the Hamm murder,'' a news release issued by the governor's office said. Ms. Fahey's request for a pardon was reviewed by the Virginia Parole Board, the Secretary of the Commonwealth's Office, the governor's executive staff and Baliles, the news release said. Vasquez received an ``absolute pardon,'' which restores his constitutional rights and leaves him without a criminal record. Ms. Fahey had predicted that Vasquez would receive a ``conditional pardon,'' which is similar to being paroled from prison. 
Car thefts dropped dramatically after the military drummed out hundreds of sticky-fingered troops, the country's constabulary chief said today. Maj. Gen. Ramon Montano said the rate of car thefts nationwide dropped from 6.6 per day in March to 1.5 per day in December. He linked the plunge to a ``no-nonsense'' campaign in which about 400 soldiers suspected of having links with car theft rings were dismissed. ``We eased them out, and of course the crimes decreased because of this,'' Montano said in a television interview. ``And I know that this policy of ours is a very big deterrent for others who may be prone to commit this crime.'' He said that the rate of serious offenses _ such as murder, rape and aggravated assault _ decreased from 17 incidents per 100,000 people in 1987 to 14 per 100,000 last year. However, total crime rate, including serious crimes, went up by 1.2 percent from 1987 to 1988, Montano said. He gave no comparative figures. ``We in the Philippine Constabulary are happy because the crime rate was controllable last year,'' Montano said. He said more police would help in their drive against criminals. ``This, together with getting rid of our own misfits and scalawags, and increasing our crime solution efficiency, we hope (would) increase the deterrent effect of our laws.'' 
Authorities in Cambodia inaugurated a memorial near the capital to 20,000 people reportedly massacred at the site by the ousted Khmer Rouge regime, a news report seen here said. Cambodia's official SPK news agency said authorities dedicated the 128-foot Buddhist shrine on Sunday at the mass grave at Cheung Ek district, 13 miles southwest of Phnom Penh. Nguon Nhel, a senior official of the ruling Communist Party, said at the ceremony that the 16-level memorial symbolizes the crimes of the Khmer Rouge, who he said killed 3,314,770 people during their 1975-78 rule. The Khmer Rouge, also Communists, conducted mass killings while trying to transform Cambodia into a primitive agrarian society. Vietnam invaded Cambodia in late 1978, driving out the Khmer Rouge and installing a pro-Hanoi government in Phnom Penh. The Khmer Rouge is now the largest guerrilla group fighting the Vietnamese. 
A top bank official says the Federal Home Loan Bank Board's dual role as regulator of the savings industry and promoter of home ownership has contributed to the wave of S&amp;L failures. L. William Seidman, chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., which insures deposits in commercial banks, said Wednesday the insurance fund for S&amp;Ls should be independent of the bank board. The primary goal of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp., which insures deposits up to $100,000, is the safety and soundness of savings institutions, he said. However, the FSLIC's parent, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, is also charged with creating, or chartering, S&amp;Ls to provide a steady flow of mortgage money to home buyers. ``There's a basic conflict between those two roles and I think it's very important that they be separated so that the insurer ... can protect his insurance fund and not allow institutions that operate in an unsafe and unsound manner to have insurance,'' Seidman told reporters at a luncheon to release a 408-page FDIC report, ``Deposit Insurance for the Nineties: Meeting the Challenge.'' He recommended a regulatory structure for S&amp;Ls similar to the system for banks. The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, an arm of the Treasury Department, charters national banks, while the FDIC insures their deposits. The U.S. League of Savings Institutions, the industry's largest trade group, has not taken a position on separating the FSLIC from the bank board, but its chairman, B.R. Beeksma, said recently the question should be considered. The bank board's performance as a chartering agency may be suffering because it is consumed with the problems of the FSLIC, he said. The FDIC, which prepared the report for Congress, also recommended placing S&amp;L examiners under the FSLIC. Currently, the examiners work for the regional Federal Home Loan Banks, which lend money to S&amp;Ls, are owned by the industry and are controlled by boards composed of S&amp;L executives. The current system can have the effect of allowing S&amp;Ls with representatives on the regional bank boards to regulate their competitors, Seidman said. The FDIC made no recommendation on how money should be raised to pay for the S&amp;L crisis, but said it was clear that the federal government, rather than the S&amp;L industry or banks, will have to pay most of the $60 billion to $115 billion needed to restore S&amp;Ls to health. But, it said, ``concerns about the federal budget deficit could be mitigated by an off-budget financing arrangement'' in which the Treasury pays the interest on borrowing to finance the industry's rescue. The Treasury Department is preparing a recommendation for President-elect Bush and the new Congress. Meanwhile, the FDIC rejected proposals to curtail or eliminate federal deposit insurance, arguing that would increase the danger of bank runs. Some scholars say reducing or doing away with the insurance would force depositors to pay more attention to how well their institutions are run. The American Bankers Association said in a statement Wednesday that the current practice of protecting even depositors with funds in excess of the $100,000 insurance limit ``has become a license for abuse by some financial managers.'' But, Seidman said, ``In today's complex world, we think the depositor, both sophisticated and unsophisticated, would have great difficulty in knowing the condition of their banks on a day-to-day basis. ... We as bank regulators with thousands of supervisors have difficulty in keeping control of banks in terms of their exact financial condition.'' 
NBC racked up its 15th consecutive victory, its longest streak in the Nielsens, but CBS was celebrating by winning the top four spots in the rankings and the highest-rated TV movie this season. ``The Karen Carpenter Story,'' about the life and death of the popular singer, followed a big football game Sunday night and ran against ``A View to a Kill'' on ABC and ``Gremlins'' on NBC. It was the No. 1 show last week with a rating of 26.3 and a 41 share, the A.C. Nielsen Co. said. That topped the CBS movie of two weeks ago, ``A Very Brady Christmas,'' which had been the highest-rated movie this season with a 25.1 and 39. Each rating point equals 904,000 homes with television. The share is a percentage of sets in use during the show's time period. Sunday's NFL playoff game between Minnesota and San Francisco boosted CBS' Sunday night lineup. The top 10 shows were: ``The Karen Carpenter Story,'' ``Murder, She Wrote,'' ``60 Minutes,'' ``NFL Playoff Post-Game Show,'' all CBS; ABC's ``Roseanne,'' NBC's ``The Cosby Show'' and ``Cheers,'' ABC's ``Who's the Boss?'' and NBC's ``A Different World'' and ``Unsolved Mysteries.'' For the week, NBC had a 13.6 rating, and CBS edged ABC for second, 12.3 to 12.2. CBS' ``Quiet Victory: The Charlie Wedemeyer Story,'' another fact-based movie about a football coach who battled Lou Gehrig's Disease, also scored well and ranked 18th, giving CBS its first Monday night victory this season. The ``CBS Evening News'' rounded out a good-news week for the network by maintaining its narrow lead in the news race. CBS had a 12.1 rating and a 22 share. ``ABC World News Tonight'' had an 11.4 and 21. ``NBC Nightly News'' had an 11.2 and 21. 
Unions representing editorial and other employees of the official Sudan News Agency say they will strike for a week, starting Saturday, to protest what they called deteriorating standards in the agency. The five unions said in a statement Wednesday that the walkout also is to support demands for a stronger administration and removal of government control from news story content. The government divested itself of newspapers after President Gaafar Nimeiri was overthrown in April 1985, but kept control of the news agency under the Ministry of Culture. Nimeiri created SUNA in 1972. It was generously funded when it served as Nimeiri's mouthpiece, but its financing and facilities were reduced greatly after 1985. Sudan's official radio and television and independent newspapers rely heavily on SUNA for news, especially from outside Khartoum. 
Here are the prime-time television ratings as compiled by the A.C. Nielsen Co. for the week of Dec. 26-Jan. 1. Top 20 listings include the week's ranking, with full season-to-date ranking in parentheses, rating for the week, and total homes. An ``X'' in parentheses denotes one-time-only presentation. A rating measures the percentage of the nation's 90.4 million TV homes. 1. (28) ``The Karen Carpenter Story'' _ ``CBS Sunday Movie,'' 26.3 rating, 23.8 million homes. 2. (8) ``Murder, She Wrote,'' CBS, 22.9, 20.7 million homes. 3. (6) ``60 Minutes,'' CBS, 21.9, 19.8 million homes. 4. (X) ``CBS NFL Playoffs Post-Game,'' CBS, 21.4, 19.3 million homes. 5. (2) ``Roseanne,'' ABC, 21.2, 19.2 million homes. 6. (1) ``The Cosby Show,'' NBC, 20.9 rating, 18.9 million homes. 7. (2) ``Cheers,'' NBC, 18.7, 16.9 million homes. 8. (7) ``Who's the Boss?'', ABC, 18.6, 16.8 million homes. 9. (4) ``A Different World,'' NBC, 18.0, 16.3 million homes. 10. (22) ``Unsolved Mysteries,'' NBC, 17.8, 16.1 million homes. 11. (17) ``In the Heat of the Night,'' NBC, 17.5, 15.8 million homes. 12. (13) ``Matlock,'' NBC, 16.8, 15.2 million homes. 13. (19) ``Night Court,'' NBC, 15.2, 13.7 million homes. 13. (11) ``Dear John,'' NBC, 15.2, 13.7 million homes. 15. (5) ``Golden Girls,'' NBC, 15.0, 13.6 million homes. 15. (15) ``ALF,'' NBC, 15.0, 13.6 million homes. 15. (10) ``Growing Pains,'' ABC, 15.0, 13.6 million homes. 18. (X) ``Quiet Victory: The Charlie Wedemeyer Story'' _ ``CBS Special Movie Presentation,'' 14.9, 13.5 million homes. 19. (13) ``L.A. Law,'' NBC, 14.7, 13.3 million homes. 20. (15) ``Head of the Class,'' ABC, 14.6, 13.2 million homes. 
21. (26) ``Knots Landing,'' CBS, 14.3. 21. (32) ``Full House,'' ABC, 14.3. 23. (32) ``Wonder Years'' ABC, 14.2. 24. (36) ``Midnight Caller,'' NBC, 13.7. 24. (38) ``Kate &amp; Allie,'' CBS, 13.7. 24. (39) ``Perfect Strangers,'' ABC, 13.7. 27. (X) ``Growing Pains Special,'' ABC, 13.6. 28. (47) ``Mr. Belvedere,'' ABC, 13.5. 29. (25) ``Moonlighting,'' ABC, 13.3. 30. (X) ``Ice Capades,'' ABC, 13.2. 31. (X) ``The Sound of Music'' _ ``NBC Movie of the Week,'' 13.0. 32. (19) ``Hunter,'' NBC, 12.8. 32. (46) ``Newhart,'' CBS, 12.8. 32. (29) ``Family Ties,'' NBC, 12.8. 32. (23) ``Gremlins'' _ ``NBC Sunday Night Movie,'' 12.8. 36. (9) ``Empty Nest,'' NBC, 12.7. 36. (39) ``20-20,'' ABC, 12.7. 36. (42) ``China Beach,'' ABC, 12.7. 39. (43) ``A View to a Kill'' _ ``ABC Sunday Night Movie,'' 12.6. 40. (18) ``Miracle at Beekman Place'' _ ``NBC Monday Night Movies,'' 12.3. 41. (X) ``Ewoks: The Battle for Endor'' _ ``ABC Movie Special,'' 12.1. 42. (36) ``Hooperman,'' ABC, 11.9. 43. (56) ``The Equalizer,'' CBS, 11.3. 44. (41) ``Day By Day,'' NBC, 11.0. 45. (63) ``Superman III'' _ ``ABC Saturday Night Movie,'' 10.9. 46. (X) ``Orange Bowl Parade,'' NBC, 10.8. 47. (53) ``St. Elmo's Fire'' _ ``CBS Tuesday Movies,'' 10.6. 48. (58) ``Paradise,'' CBS, 10.1. 49. (65) ``Incredible Sunday,'' ABC, 9.5. 50. (57) ``All New Sport Goofy'' _ ``Magical World of Disney,'' NBC, 8.8. 51. (X) ``Kennedy Center Honors,'' CBS, 8.6. 52. (64) ``48 Hours: America For Sale,'' CBS, 8.4. 53. (X) ``Burning Questions: Kids' Diet of Danger,'' ABC, 8.1. 54. (58) ``Beauty and the Beast,'' CBS, 8.0. 54. (X) ``Happy New Year, Charlie Brown,'' CBS, 8.0. 56. (61) ``Mission: Impossible,'' ABC, 7.9. 57. (X) ``Koppel Report: News From Earth,'' ABC, 7.7. 58. (NA) ``Married...With Children,'' FOX, 7.2. 59. (NA) ``America's Most Wanted,'' FOX, 6.7. 60. (69) ``Dirty Dancing,'' CBS, 6.5. 61. (76) ``Simon &amp; Simon,'' CBS, 6.2. 62. (69) ``Annie McGuire,'' CBS, 6.1. 63. (X) ``Dirty Dancing Special,'' CBS, 6.0. 64. (X) ``NBC News Special: Sarafina,'' NBC, 5.7. 65. (78) ``Raising Miranda,'' CBS, 5.6. 66. (73) ``West 57th,'' CBS, 4.7. 67. (NA) ``21 Jump Street,'' FOX, 4.4. 68. (NA) ``The Reporters,'' FOX, 3.6. 69. (NA) ``Garry Shandling Show,'' FOX, 3.5. 70. (NA) ``Tracey Ullman Show,'' FOX, 3.1. 71. (NA) ``Duet,'' FOX, 2.6. 72. (NA) ``Beyond Tomorrow,'' FOX, 2.2. 
Eastern Europeans searching each other's stores for bargains in Soviet caviar, Czech auto parts and Bulgarian sportswear have set off an unprecedented ``customs war'' in the communist bloc. The new Soviet freedom to travel and relaxations on travel throughout much of Eastern Europe lie behind the East's trade skirmishes and new trends in bargain hunting both east and west. The first salvo was fired by Czechoslovakia, which on Nov. 15 gave its Warsaw Pact allies only 24 hours notice that it was banning the export of 80 consumer items, including toilet paper, children's clothes, cars and car parts, bananas and chocolate. Czechoslovak officials explained the sudden action with the need to protect their own consumers, who are used to a relatively cozy standard of living that the Prague government is finding harder to maintain as the economy stagnates. East Germany, whose 17 million citizens frequently journey to Czechoslovakia as the only nation they can visit without a visa, swiftly fired back a reply. On Nov. 18, it banned the export of items ranging from curtains to maps _ both popular purchases for Czechoslovaks crossing into East Germany. Poland was so enraged by the Czechoslovak restrictions that it took the unusual step of summoning Czechoslovakia's ranking consular official to the Foreign Ministry in Warsaw to explain the new customs restrictions. Poles, who have the reputation in Eastern Europe of being the region's greatest black market traders, grumbled about five-hour delays at the Czechoslovak border as guards searched trains for hidden supplies of fruit, meat and tea that can no longer be taken out of the country. Czechoslovakia's Communist Party daily newspaper Rude Pravo noted, meanwhile, that in the first nine months of 1988, six Poles, four East Germans and three Hungarians visited Czechoslovakia for every Czech or Slovak going to those nations. The Soviet Union took a little longer to react to Czechoslovakia's sudden steps, waiting until last weekend to announce a ban from February on the export of caviar, coffee, children's clothes and electrical goods. Black market dealers in caviar in Vienna say the ban on that luxury item may be prompted more by heavy pollution killing caviar-producing fish in the Caspian sea, while Polish dealers in caviar brought back by Polish workers from the Soviet Union doubt the ban will affect their supplies. The Czechoslovak ban seems to have been the main reason for the Soviet move. ``I hope we are taking retaliatory measures,'' said a senior Soviet economist visiting Vienna in December. ``We can't let the Czechoslovaks just behave like that, however much they want to protect their market.'' In Vienna and eastern Austria, Hungarians' year-old new freedom to travel West as often as they like has spawned dozens of new stores touting the video recorders and sophisticated electronic goods Hungarians love. On Nov. 7, when they were supposed to be celebrating the 71st anniversary of the 1917 Bolshevik revolution, 100,000 people from Hungary brought traffic to a complete standstill in Vienna. Hungarians spent the equivalent of $500 million in Austria last year, while Austrians _ who have long enjoyed the cheap dental services, salami and other goods available in Hungary _ dumped the equivalent of $300 million in Hungary. Other Westerners enjoying East bloc plenty are Greeks who travel to neighboring Bulgaria. Apparently anxious to protect its own consumer market from Greeks, Israeli and Arab tourists who buy cheap dairy products, bedding, blankets and shoes, Bulgaria in December clamped an export ban on those items and dozens of others. Many of the items that fall under the new East bloc restrictions may not seem desirable to the Western consumer. Bulgarian vacuum cleaners, Soviet refrigerators and tea from Czechoslovakia may seem unlikely prizes, but they often compensate for shortages at home, or can be sold to residents of East bloc nations willing to pay double or more for such a consumer prize. Last summer, Austrian border crossings into Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and Yugoslavia were crowded with East European cars _ mostly East German Trabants driven by enterprising Poles _ weighed down to the ground with goods to be sold or consumed at home. Even before Czechoslovakia formally restricted such traffic, it drew the ire of the nation's border guards. A line of 50 cars, mostly Poles returning from vacations in Yugoslavia, waited six hours _ until 3 a.m. _ to cross into Bratislava from Austria last August. When asked why, a Czechoslovak customs official, muttered, ``The bloody Poles!'' The new freedom to travel also has strained the East bloc's transport capacaties. Soviets who went on unbridled shopping sprees in Prague's relatively well-stocked and brightly decorated stores found last summer that it would take at leat a bottle of Russian vodka to bribe their way home on hopelessly overbooked trains. The daily sleeper between Vienna and Moscow also is overbooked, with many Soviet travelers returning from the West reserving bunks simply to take their overweight imports of videocassettes, televisions and other Western goodies. The only nation that so far seems unaffected by the East European travel boom is Romania, whose 23 million citizens have scarce opportunity to journey abroad. Those who do get out find their extreme shortages at home _ even bread was unavailable in Bucharest for a week in July _ make them grateful for the smallest luxury outside. ``Mmm, what a beer!'' beamed a contented Romanian visiting Vienna. ``I'd forgotten the taste.'' 
The head of the Food and Drug Administration says the number of applications for new drug approvals is doubling every year, a pace that threatens to choke the agency's ability to pass judgment on them. ``We cannot do this with smoke and mirrors,'' FDA Commissioner Frank E. Young on Wednesday told a panel of researchers looking for ways to speed approval of drugs for treating cancer and AIDS. Young said the FDA is receiving an average of 10 applications each month requesting permission to begin clinical trials for a new drug, the first step in getting the drug approved for prescription use by the public. The monthly total has doubled every year since 1984, he said. Unless the agency gets more staff, ``the whole ship is going to sink,'' Young said after his presentation. Young defended his agency's record against criticism from government cancer researchers that the FDA is slow in approving new drugs that offer hope of prolonging the lives of cancer and AIDS sufferers. ``Drugs for the desperately ill remain our highest priority,'' Young said. ``Certainly, there will be honest disagreements and inadvertent delays,'' he said. ``But the point I want to make is that we place the highest priority on the review of drugs for life-threatening illness.'' The FDA's review time for 12 important cancer drugs approved in recent years averaged just over 10 months, he said. The only drug so far approved for AIDS patients, AZT, was approved in 107 days, he said. New streamlined procedures announced last fall will cut FDA review time in half, he added. But National Cancer Institute officials said the FDA should be more flexible in its requirements and encourage early testing of new drugs in children who have cancer and AIDS. They also said the FDA is too stringent in the proof it requires that a proposed new medication extend survival longer than existing drugs. ``You have to stay away from'' insisting on such evidence because the result is that ``it rations a therapy,'' said Dr. Samuel Broder, new director of the National Cancer Institute. Young said the criticism reflects a ``misperception about FDA requirements.'' He said effects other than survival are considered in approval reviews. Dr. Louis Lasagna, chairman of the panel studying how to speed up the process, said his committee hopes to establish ``mechanisms to mediate'' the fireworks between the FDA and the cancer institute. ``Because there is so much public pressure regarding AIDS, about not wasting time getting treatments to victims ... we might be able to capitalize on that concern to bring about improvements in the drug approval process,'' Lasagna said. The panel of nine scientists from leading pharmaceutical and biotechnical companies and major universities and laboratories was appointed by the President's Cancer Panel, headed by Dr. Armand Hammer. President-elect Bush, as chief of the Presidential Task Force on Regulatory Relief, last year asked the cancer panel to undertake the study. Hammer said that in a meeting Tuesday, Bush repeated his commitment to the project. ``He was so positive,'' Hammer said. ``I've known him for a great number of years and I've never known him to be so keen about something as he is about that.'' 
The New York bureau chief and a producer of a French television station were arrested Wednesday and charged with trying to check fake bombs at Kennedy Airport, and a Dutch TV station reported smuggling a phony bomb onto a London-bound flight, authorities said. In Amsterdam, TV station Veronica filmed one of its reporters carrying an attache case containing the imitation bomb through security checkpoints and onto an aircraft at Schiphol Airport, considered one of the safest in Europe. In the Kennedy Airport incident, three packages containing bogus bombs were left for shipment on Paris-bound flights at the small cargo areas of three international airlines, Port Authority police said. The packages also contained a typed message that read in part: ``Congratulations! You have found our phony bomb! (made with molding clay, one alarm clock and wires),'' said PA spokesman Armando Arrastia. The message was written on the letterhead of the French television station TF1 and signed by the station's New York bureau chief, Alain Chaillou, he said. Bruce Frankel, 37, a TF1 producer, was arrested at 3:30 p.m. after a TWA counter employee became suspicious of a 6-inch-by-8-inch package Frankel wanted to check through to Paris, Arrastia said. Inspecting the package, the employee found what appeared to be a bomb, he said. When PA police arrived, Frankel cried, ``No, no it's a fake!'' and ``took the bomb apart as the police officer and others watched,'' Arrastia said. Frankel then told police he had delivered two similar packages to the small cargo areas of Pan American Airlines and Air France, Arrastia said. Chaillou turned himself in to police later, and both men were charged with violating the federal explosives statute, said FBI agent Mary Frances Lilly. A package had been accepted at Air France at about 2 p.m. by an employee who knew Frankel because he often used the airlines to send film to the television station in Paris, said Bruce Haxthausen, an Air France spokesman. Because of Wednesday's incident, Haxthausen said, Air France will be inspecting every shipment received at a cargo facility, rather than random inspections of cargoes received from known shippers. The Air France cargo area was evacuated for a brief time after authorities were notified about the suspicious package, said Haxthausen. At the Pan Am small cargo check-in, the package had been accepted and ``was on its way to the X-ray when the New York Port Authority police walked in and seized the package,'' said Alan Loflin, an airline spokesman. TWA spokesman Robert Blattner said, ``We are very pleased our employees were able to use their techniques and just solve the case on the spot.'' Frankel and Chaillou were being held at the Metropolitan Correctional Center in Manhattan, Lilly said, and on Thursday were to appear before a U.S. magistrate. Alouane Jeanterne, a documentary producer at TF1, said he learned of Frankel and Chaillou's arrests late Wednesday when Chaillou's wife, Cerile, called him at the station's New York bureau. He said he didn't know anything about the airport incident before that. ``If you're asking me my ethical judgment about it, I really don't know,'' said Jeanterne. ``Every reporter has his own way of getting things, of getting sources, of getting to the news. I have not come to a private opinion yet. My own thinking now is what is going to happen to Chaillou.'' He said he did not know if Chaillou's superiors in Paris knew anything in advance about the bogus explosives. The message contained in each of the packages, also said: ``We are TF1, the largest television network in France, and it is with due respect and great pleasure that we will tell our 18 million viewers who watch our daily newscast at 8, that we found your company to be keen and consistent with security matters.'' In Amsterdam, television station Veronica reported Wednesday that it smuggled its fake bomb onto a London-bound flight to demonstrate that terrorists can pass security checks with relative ease. The imitation bomb consisted of harmless paste made to resemble a plastic explosive of the type thought responsible for the Dec. 21 bombing of Pan American flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, which killed 270 people, the report said. Reporter Gert Berg carried the briefcase, which also contained a portable stereo wired to resemble a detonator, onto the aircraft. He was filmed putting the fake explosive and detonator into the case, checking his baggage and opening the attache case on the aircraft. The case was filmed passing through an X-ray device. The airline involved was not identified on the program. A written response by airport police read on the program said they may install more comprehensive scanning equipment when testing on machines in the United States and Britain is complete. Rick Hirs, spokesman for Schiphol police, could not be reached for comment despite several attempts by The Associated Press. 
The Congressional Budget Office says slashing next year's federal deficit is going to be a more formidable job than Reagan administration officials and aides to President-elect Bush realize. The budget office, in a report released Wednesday, said the fiscal 1990 deficit will be $141 billion unless new taxes or spending cuts are instituted. The Reagan administration has estimated next year's red ink at a more manageable $127 billion. The numbers presented by the non-partisan congressional agency, if accurate, would make it even more difficult for Bush and Congress to meet the Gramm-Rudman balanced budget law's 1990 deficit target of $100 billion. Under that law, if the government fails to come within $10 billion of the deficit target, spending cuts are automatically triggered in a range of domestic and defense programs until the goal is achieved. Most lawmakers say the resulting reductions in federal services would be so unpopular with the public that this path is politically unfeasible. The Gramm-Rudman law states that the administration's deficit forecast _ not the one made by CB0 _ determines whether the automatic cuts would be necessary. But Congress relies on the CBO figures as a guideline in its budget work. ``Both the Congress and the president, if those projections were way off, will face the same consequences,'' new House Budget Committee Chairman Leon Panetta, D-Calif., said of the administration's more optimistic forecast. If CBO is correct, Bush and lawmakers will have to find $41 billion in deficit reductions to meet the Gramm-Rudman target. Even if the administration's forecast is accurate, many legislators have said that Bush's repeated campaign promises to forego new taxes will make it hard to avoid Gramm-Rudman's automatic cuts. On Monday, 11 days before he leaves office, President Reagan will present Congress with a $1.2 trillion budget for fiscal 1990, which begins Oct. 1. Administration officials have said Reagan found enough savings to produce a $92.5 billion deficit, well within the Gramm-Rudman goal. Reagan has said if his cuts are made, the budget will be balanced by 1993, the same year the Gramm-Rudman law requires the elimination of the deficit. The CBO report said, however, that without savings, 1993 will see $129 billion in red ink. Reagan's spending plan is not binding, and Bush and lawmakers will virtually have to start all over again in their efforts to forge a 1990 spending blueprint. Last year's deficit was $155 billion, and CBO thinks it will again be that large for fiscal 1989. The CBO raised its deficit projections from a forecast last August by $7 billion for the current fiscal year and $5 billion for fiscal 1990. The key reason: the cost of shoring up the ailing savings and loan industry. The CBO deficit report was based on projections that the economy would continue a slow but steady growth of 2.2 percent in 1990 and 1991 and 2.3 percent in each of the next two years, with unemployment holding steady, inflation increasing slightly next year and interest rates gradually declining. 
The Agriculture Department says Americans seem to be eating a bit more each year but are choosier about what's on the menu. A 20-year statistical study by the department's Economic Research Service found that per capita food consumption overall rose 0.7 percent in 1987 to a record level, including a 1.8 percent increase in foods from crops, while food from animals dropped 0.3 percent. Analysts said the decline in animal products occurred as a result of lower per capita consumption of beef, eggs, whole milk, butter, lard and edible tallow. The agency cautioned in the report about taking the figures too literally because much of the information is derived from farm-to-market statistics and other trade information. ``Strictly speaking, the food disappearance estimates should be designated as supplies moving through trade channels for domestic consumption,'' the report said. ``However, because most foods are perishable, changes in disappearance presumably are associated with changes in actual consumption.'' The information is useful as an indicator of trends, even if ``it is not a measure of actual consumption or the quantity ingested'' by consumers, the report added. For example, the latest review by USDA economists said that crop food consumption rose 17 percent from 1967 to 1987, compared with a 3.5 percent increase in the consumption of animal products. ``Consumption of foods in most crop categories has risen steadily in the last 20 years, especially fats and oils, vegetable, grain products and sweeteners,'' the report said. ``Use of fruit jumped in the mid-1980s. In contrast, Americans used less red meat, eggs, fluid milk and cream, and animal fats, moderating the increase for animal products.'' Of all the meat consumed by Americans in 1987, 59 percent was red meat _ mainly beef and pork _ compared with 71 percent in the early 1970s. Instead, people ate more poultry and fish. In 1987, for the first time, the per capita consumption of poultry, on a retail weight basis, was greater than beef _ 78 pounds per person, compared with 73 pounds, the report said. But there's a catch. Measured on the basis of boneless weight, Americans still ate more beef _ 69 pounds versus 55 pounds. ``That is because poultry at the retail level contains relatively more bone than beef does,'' the report said. Per capita consumption of fishery products in 1987 was a record 15.4 pounds, up 45 percent from 1967 and 21 percent more than in 1977. Egg consumption in 1987 dropped 23 per cent to a per capita average of 249 eggs from 322 in 1967. The all-time record was 403 eggs in 1945. In the period of 1985-87, the United States led the world by consuming an average 248 pounds of red meat and poultry per person. That is a ``carcass weight'' equivalent before a slaughtered animal is divided into smaller cuts. Australia was second at 230 pounds carcass weight per capita, followed by Argentina and New Zealand, each at 226 pounds. The Soviet Union, by comparison, averaged 145 pounds per capita. Japan and Iceland lead the world in the consumption of fishery products. In the period of 1982-84, the typical Japanese consumed annually an average of 190 pounds of fish and shellfish, liveweight equivalent, more than five times, the consumption of the average American. 
The Agriculture Department says private exporters have sold an additional 440,000 metric tons of U.S. wheat to China at subsidized prices and more corn to the Soviet Union. Melvin E. Sims, general sales manager for the department's Foreign Agricultural Service, said Wednesday the wheat was part of 1 million tons authorized Dec. 30 for China under the Export Enhancement Program, or EEP. Under the EEP arrangement, exporters can sell wheat and other designated commodities to specified countries at reduced prices in order to meet foreign competition. Exporters then collect free government surpluses of grain or other products as bonuses, or subsidies. The wheat sales, equal to about 17.3 million bushels, were handled by five companies: Continental Grain Co., 70,000 tons; Cargill Inc., 270,000; Tradigrain Inc., 30,000; Tradecom Inc., 30,000; and Louis Dreyfus Corp., 40,000. Sims said the wheat was sold for January delivery and will carry an average subsidy rate of $22.64 per ton, or about 62 cents per bushel. Counting some wheat left over from previous EEP arrangements, China has 570,000 tons still available under the program. The Soviet Union bought an additional 250,000 tons of corn for delivery under a long-term grain agreement with the United States. That boosted corn sales to the Soviets in the 1988-89 agreement year to nearly 10.2 million tons. Besides the corn, the Soviets have ordered 370,000 tons of wheat, 450,000 tons of soybeans and 1,132,500 tons of soybean meal, plus 500,000 tons of grain sorghum for 1988-89 delivery. Only the wheat has been subsidized. A metric ton is about 2,205 pounds and is equal to 39.4 bushels of corn or 36.7 bushels of wheat or soybeans. The 440,000 tons of wheat would be about 16.1 million bushels. The latest corn sales to the Soviet Union would be about 9.9 million bushels. Wheat prices at the farm have been averaging around $4 per bushel, according to recent USDA market figures, making the new sale worth an estimated $64 million. The corn, at $2.60 per bushel, could have a farm value of about $26 million. 
With speculation that the first indictments could come soon in the Pentagon fraud case, new court papers provide fresh details on how one private consultant in the case allegedly trafficked in valuable Department information. A federal grand jury is meeting today and Friday outside Washington, where U.S. attorney Henry Hudson is spearheading the nationwide investigation that began in September 1986. Sharon Dibbley, Hudson's spokeswoman, refused to say whether any indictments would be handed up this week, but one defense attorney guessed they could come on Friday. Last November, Hudson predicted indictments could be in hand that month. Dibbley also kept mum about if and when any plea bargaining arrangements might be revealed. Hazeltine Corp., of Long Island, N.Y., has said it is cooperating with the government, according to company attorney, William Cummings. Meantime, a search warrant unsealed this week in federal court painted a vivid picture of the activities of William Parkin, a consultant who made money obtaining information for large defense contractors. Among the contractors who paid Parkin thousands of dollars were Hazeltine, Teledyne Electronics of Newbury Park, Calif.; Northrop Corp., and Unisys. Central to the government's case are allegations that consultants bribed Defense Department employees to secure insider information about lucrative, multimillion-dollar government contracts. Parkin, who was employed by the Navy's Joint Cruise Missile Project Office from 1977 until 1983, used a variety of means to obtain information, the search warrant says. Information was obtained through telephone intercepts and recorded conversations. Parkin's attorney, Gerard Treanor, has said that his client is confident that he had done nothing wrong. ``Parkin is going to be found not guilty before a jury,'' he said. Here, for example, are some of Parkin's methods for obtaining information, according to the search warrant. _ Last February, Parkin, who was paid by Northrop, sought information about figures on how much the Navy planned to spend on the medium-range remotely piloted vehicle. Northrop was interested in the contract. A Navy official would not tell Parkin, but ``did leave Parkin alone in (the) ... office so that Parkin could sneak a look at the papers on the desk.'' Parkin obtained the numbers. _ Parkin paid Jean Uebele, a former contract negotiator at the cruise missile office where Parkin once worked, $100 a week for information, the warrant says. ``Uebele frequently called for her biweekly checks of $50,'' the paper said. Sheila Wohlfarth, then Parkin's secretary, once told Uebele she was making the checks out to ``Smith's Maid Service.'' Occasionally, Parkin asked Uebele for copies of documents. ``In one conversation in March 1987, Uebele called Parkin and told him that if he parked his car in her place at the Pentagon, she would put materials in the trunk, including all of her instructions, cost and pricing lists, reference books, copies of every contract and information relating to MCDEC,'' the Marine Corps Development Education Center, the search warrant said. Uebele retired from her job at the Navy last week, her office said. Her office did not have a forwarding telephone number and her home number was not listed. _ Mrs. Wohlfarth, Parkin's secretary, was the wife of Robert Wohlfarth, a patent attorney with the Navy. ``In an April 1987 conversation Wohlfarth complained to his wife that Parkin promptly paid the other guys he worked with or they called him. The implication was that Parkin owed Wohlfarth for the information he had provided,'' the search warrant said. Wohlfarth refused to discuss his relationship, referring all telephone calls to his attorney, Neil Eggleston, who was out of town. Prosecutors said last week they no longer need to keep under seal search warrants and affidavits issued in June because they've completed the investigative phase of the case. Papers have been released here and in Brooklyn, N.Y., but remain under seal in St. Louis, Minneapolis and Los Angeles. 
A health food store manager from New York said an upset stomach today kept him from trying to beat his previous world record of walking with a bottle of milk on his head for 32 miles. Ashrita Furman, of Queens, who has more listings in the Guinness Book of World Records than anyone else, was going to perform the feat on the track at Independence Stadium. ``I was throwing up and having diarrhea all night long,'' Furman, 35, told reporters. He said he will take another shot at the record later this month when he travels to Chiangmai, Thailand on a tour by the Queens-based Sri Chinmoy Center for meditation, yoga exercises and culture. Furman, who has rolled, hopped, jumped, rowed, clapped, skipped, somersaulted and balanced his way to 11 world records, was presented a ``versatility'' record by the Guinness Book of World Records in 1987 for having records in more categories than anyone else in the world. 
A libel case brought by Tom Selleck's father will go to trial against a supermarket tabloid, which claimed Robert Selleck gave his son's ``love secrets'' to the publication, the state Supreme Court ruled. The court on Wednesday unanimously upheld a lower-court ruling reinstating Robert Selleck's libel lawsuit against Globe International and upholding his status as a private figure, which makes it easier to win a libel case. The lawsuit stems from a December 1982 issue of the Globe that carried the front-page headline, ``Tom Selleck's Love Secrets _ By His Father.'' The story, on an inside page, was headlined, ``Why Tom Selleck Can Never Be a Happy Lover.'' It said Robert Selleck had described his son as shy and ill at ease with women, and quoted the elder Selleck as saying, ``Tom's relationships with women in his life are always disappointing because he's just not the person they think he should be. He's shy and sensitive, not rough and rugged.'' In his lawsuit, Robert Selleck said he had a brief, innocuous conversation with the writer of the article, but denied saying anything about his son's relationships with women. Stephen Rawson, a Globe lawyer, said, ``We expect to prevail in the case eventually.'' Robert Selleck's attorney did not immediately return telephone calls. 
Former baseball star Steve Garvey says he's signing on as a member of a new team, and he's not talking about wearing a cap and glove again. Sometime this spring or summer Garvey plans to marry Rebecka Mendenhall, 33, who works in the political unit of Cable News Network in Atlanta, the former All-Star first baseman said Wednesday. ``Essentially we met at CNN in Atlanta when I was doing an interview there. That was a couple of years ago,'' said Garvey, whose first marriage ended in divorce. ``I gave her the ring just before Christmas so it wouldn't spoil the other presents,'' he said. Garvey, 40, played in Los Angeles for 12 years before spending his final five seasons in San Diego. He retired before the 1987 season because of a shoulder injury. Since leaving the game, Garvey has worked as a baseball commentator and has overseen his sports marketing operation in La Jolla. 
Actress Barbara Stanwyck spent three nights in a hospital for treatment of a leg injury suffered on New Year's Eve. Army Archerd, a Hollywood columnist for Daily Variety, reported Wednesday that the 81-year-old Miss Stanwyck was accidentally kicked in the leg by a friend's daughter who was wearing sharp-pointed boots. Larry Keno, a spokesman for the actress, was out of the office and unavailable for comment Wednesday, and a call to Miss Stanwyck's home rang unanswered. Miss Stanwyck was released from St. John's Hospital and Health Center on Tuesday, said hospital spokeswoman Paulette Weir, who declined further comment. The actress has starred in such films as ``Double Indemnity,'' ``Sorry, Wrong Number'' and ``Ball of Fire.'' 
Director Oliver Stone, who filmed his Academy Award winning movie ``Platoon'' in the Philippines, has returned here to complete ``Born on the Fourth of July'' starring Tom Cruise. Stone told reporters Wednesday he will finish the picture, which is about a young soldier crippled in the Vietnam War, in the northern Philippine city of Laoag. Although the scenes will supposedly take place in Mexico, Stone said he chose the Philippines because shooting here is cheaper and ``Mexico does not have all the military equipment we need.'' The production crew will use helicopters rented from the Philippine air force, he said. Stone filmed ``Platoon,'' a story of American infantrymen in Vietnam, in the Philippines in 1985. 
Eddie ``The Eagle'' Edwards says the shock of being on the verge of the best ski jump of his career landed him in an Innsbruck hospital with a broken collarbone and a concussion. The ski jumper whose ungainly form at last year's Winter Olympics won him international attention was injured in a training jump Tuesday. It was sheer panic at his good jumping position that disoriented him and sent him hurtling down the slope, Edwards said Wednesday. ``I never had such a good position before,'' he said. Edwards was training for a World Cup ski jumping event in Innsbruck when he lost control over his right ski in the air and tumbled several times on landing, knocking him unconscious and breaking his collarbone. 
Gov.-elect Evan Bayh, putting his state's money where his mouth is, has decided not to spend $10,000 to place his name on highway signs welcoming visitors to Indiana. The Department of Highways estimates that would be the total cost in labor and materials to change the name on the welcome signs at the state's borders. As a result, Bayh has ordered the department to remove the small signs reading ``Robert D. Orr, Governor'' and not to replace them. They are scheduled to come down Monday, the day of Bayh's inauguration. Bayh, son of former Sen. Birch Bayh, was elected on a campaign of cost-cutting that included refusing a pay raise and a state-owned car. 
Grand Ole Opry star Johnny Russell was listed as stable after suffering a mild heart attack, his publicist said. ``His doctors are very optimistic, '' Steve Campbell said Wednesday. ``Right now he's undergoing tests and is being monitored.'' Russell, 48, was admitted to Nashville Memorial Hospital on Tuesday, complaining of chest pains, Campbell said. He is known for his 1973 hit song ``Red Necks, White Socks and Blue Ribbon Beer.'' 
President-elect Bush was urged today to support development of new types of nuclear power plants as a way of slowing global warming caused by the ``greenhouse effect.'' Research on new types of nuclear reactors is one way to develop energy sources that produce no carbon dioxide, a principal cause of the atmospheric warming, said a panel convened by the National Academy of Sciences and two sister organizations. The academy, the National Academy of Engineering and the National Institute of Medicine made a series of recommendations to the president-elect on the environment, AIDS, space and science policy. In a cover letter to Bush, the presidents of the three bodies said, ``global environmental change must be made more prominent in the scientific, political and foreign policy agendas of the United States.'' The letter concentrated on five other points: _Since global warming and acid rain are both produced by use of fossil fuels, ``efforts to enhance both energy efficiency and conservation should be strengthened.'' It added that ways to increase ``use of the `cleanest' fossil fuels, such as natural gas, should be considered, but in the context of their finite availability.'' _Immediate assessment of possible responses to rising sea levels, drought and the northward migration of agricultural zones. _Nations that have signed a treaty to reduce emissions that destroy the ozone layer should be encouraged to accelerate those reductions and aim at a ``total phaseout.'' These chemical account for about a fifth of the expected global warming. The Environmental Protection Agency already has called for such a phaseout. _Strategies are needed to prevent the destruction of tropical forests. The loss of forests around the world probably adds a fifth of the carbon dioxide produced by fossil fuels, the group said. An area the size of Missouri is lost each year, according to some estimates, and if nothing is done there could be no tropical forests left early in the next century, the panel said. _A ``substantial investment'' is needed in ground-based and space-based monitoring of the earth. ``Leadership by the United States could be a powerful force for uniting the nations of the world in a common endeavor vitally important to all,'' the academy presidents said. The report cited predictions of a two-to-nine degrees Fahrenheit increase in average temperatures sometime in the next century and said: ``While global environmental change cannot be stopped, the pace of change can be slowed.'' ``Production of energy from fossil fuels is the root of several of the agents of global environmental change,'' the report said. The report also recommended re-examining use of wind and solar energy ``to see if recent progress has improved their economic feasibility as possible substitutes for fossil fuels in the years ahead.'' 
Brain cells produce a modified version of an important muscle protein, says a study that may help explain why muscular dystrophy causes mental impairment in some people. Scientists have been puzzled about why Duchenne muscular dystrophy, the most common and severe form of the disease, leads to mental trouble in some but not all of its victims. Duchenne is caused by defects in the gene that tells muscle cells how to make a protein called dystrophin. The defects can prevent dystrophin production, leading to progressive weakness and wasting of voluntary muscles. One-third to one-half of Duchenne patients also suffer mild to moderate mental impairment, according to the Muscular Dystrophy Association. In today's issue of the British journal Nature, Israeli scientists working with rodent tissue said they found that brain cells make a modified version of dystrophin. That suggests that the protein-making machinery in brain cells ``reads'' the dystrophin gene differently from the machinery in muscle cells, said Donald Wood of the dystrophy association, which partially financed the research. If so, defects that prevent dystrophin production in muscle may not necessarily hinder production of the brain's version, he said. So a Duchenne patient with normal production of brain dystrophin may keep normal intellectual capability, while a patient whose genetic defect hinders the brain's production of dystrophin may suffer mental impairment, Wood explained. The degree of impairment may depend on whether a patient has no brain dystrophin, too little or an abnormal form of it, Wood said. He stressed the overall concept is only speculation. Nobody knows what role dystrophin plays in the brain, he said. While the study will not immediately help in therapy, ``it represents a step forward in our evolution of understanding dystrophin,'' he said. 
The starvation death of a 14-year-old boy has been ruled a homicide, police said Wednesday, after the boy's father, mother and sisters were hospitalized for malnutrition. Eric Charles Cottam's death was ruled a homicide by Dr. George E. Hudock Jr., the Luzerne County coroner. He said the 5-foot-10 teen-ager had not eaten in at least three weeks and weighed 69 pounds, or 80 pounds less than normal. District Attorney Correale F. Stevens said he will meet Thursday with investigators to decide whether to file charges. Police called to the home by the teen's 39-year-old father, Larry Cottam, an unemployed former minister, and found the body at 11:55 a.m., police said. There was no food in the neat, sparsely furnished house, according to investigators, who spoke on condition of anonynimity. A neighbor, James Lauer, said police found the son, his mother, Leona, 37, and 12-year-old sister, Laura, in their beds. Laura and Leona Cottam were hospitalized in serious condition in Mercy Hospital in Wilkes-Barre. Cottam, a former Seventh-Day Adventist minister, also was in serious condition, said nursing supervisor Barb Jones. At a news conference after the autopsy Wednesday, Hudock said he ruled the death a homicide because he could find no disease that could have caused the teen's emaciation. ``A boy that age, of normal mental status, would want to eat,'' Hudock said. Investigators told the Wilkes-Barre Times-Leader they believed the family's religion figured in the starvation. Larry and Leona Cottam recently won the right to educate their children at home after a two-year battle with the Crestwood School District. Neighbors said the Cottams were an intensely private couple whose children rarely, if ever, socialized with other neighborhood children. Neighbors said the family was too proud to ask for public welfare after Cottam was fired from his job as a truck driver at Norandex Inc. in Wilkes-Barre in March. Cottam was pastor of four Seventh-Day Adventist churches with a congregration of about 250, until 1984, when he was transferred to Pittsburgh. The family moved back to Nuangola in 1985 after he lost his post in Pittsburgh. The Cottams were friendly and polite, according to neighbors, but became even more reclusive after they returned and were rarely seen outside the home. 
Manicurist Joyce Mays doesn't bite her nails anymore, and she stopped cutting them three years ago. The result: twisting, brightly painted, 5-inch-long talons that are her most prized possessions. Mays' clawlike fingernails astonish passersby who often peer through the window of the salon where she works and watch her give manicures. ``People stare at my nails,'' said Mays, 43. ``When they do, it doesn't bother me. I try to get closer _ and give them one of my business cards.'' To protect her nails, she never uses them in mundane tasks like dialing the phone. Instead, her knuckles get a lot of wear and tear. She also can't change the sheets on the bed, relying on her husband, Bill, to perform that chore. Every three weeks, she paints a new acrylic design on her long, long nails. When Pope John Paul II visited New Orleans last year, she painted a picture of the pontiff, hands clasped in prayer, on a thumbnail. On the other thumbnail was a likeness of St. Louis Cathedral, blue sky in the background and a banner with the pope's name flying above it. ``I like doing the different art work on my nails,'' Mays said. ``Besides, I like the attention.'' 
It sounded for a moment as though Gov. Rose Mofford had created the ultimate government agency. A news release distributed by her office Wednesday listed appointees to several state boards and commissions, including the ``Regulation Regulatory Commission.'' Aides later said the reference was a typographical error; the governor's office had meant to announce an appointment to the Radiation Regulatory Commission. 
Shhhhhh. Don't tell the folks. The fall grades on some report cards at Northwestern University might not be as good as they look. That A, B, C or D might actually be an A-minus, B-minus, C-minus or D-minus. ``The character on the printer that makes the minus sign was worn down to the point that when it hit the paper, it didn't make an impression,'' university Registrar Donald Gwinn said Wednesday. So no minuses were visible on report cards mailed to undergraduates. Gwinn said his office learned about the problem Tuesday when the new term started and some students complained that their fall grade-point averages did not match the grades printed on the report cards. For example, students whose reports cards listed A's for every fall subject were puzzled when the grade-point average did not read a perfect 4.0. ``They may have had a minus in a class _ but they couldn't see it,'' Gwinn said. New report cards will not be issued, but students can get free transcripts that show the actual grades, he said. 
Step inside Yogi Ward's taxi and enter a fantasyland where the driver is king and every day's a holiday. Flashing lights rim the ceiling and tinsel brushes a rider's head as the car rumbles through city streets. The decor changes with the season, but Ward, armed with phone, beeper and taped words of wisdom, remains the same. Ward, 44, figures he'll keep the New Year's decorations for a few weeks, before it's time to bring out the pink paper hearts, arrows and cupids for Valentine's Day. ``It's cheerful, it's an idealistic type of thing, it's a situation that keeps a lot of stress off of you and it's a happy cab,'' said Ward, 44, who owns the cab and drives for Checker Taxi Co. Ward said he decided to decorate his taxi a few years ago, when he was working for another cab company. ``I had seen a few cabs around the city that had some ornaments and they were not displayed correctly, as I would think they should have been,'' Ward said. ``So I decided to display them in the proper way,'' he said while cruising north on a Chicago expressway. Ward serached the city's variety stores, picking up bundles of tacky decorations for every occasion. ``I give away little hearts and candies for Valentine's Day,'' he said. ``St. Patrick's Day, I mostly have those four-leaf clovers and have the Irish green different things in the car.'' ``Everyone loves it and nobody wants me to take the decorations down,'' he said. ``People are waving at me down the street. I had a police paddy wagon wave at me. State troopers wave at me. An ambulance tipped their lights at me. ``I had one lady that came to the cab and said, ```Ooh, the Christmas cab is here!''' Another woman took one look at his cab and said, ```That's just too Christmassy.' She decided that she'd wait for the next cab,'' he recalled. But there's more to Ward's cab than decorations. He plays cassettes of his own weather reports, news items, and offers words of wisdom. ``If you're out there ... smoking, bebopping or doing something that you're not supposed to be doing ... the police are out in droves and they'll be waiting for you,'' says Ward's tape for the New Year. He's working on his Valentine's Day message. For those for think one ride with Ward is not enough, he hands out gold business cards with the number of his car phone, his beeper number, his home number, and a phone number for an answering service. Beverly Morris, a 36-year-old advertising saleswoman, has been a Ward customer for about five years. ``It's a nice refreshing thing ... especially the Christmas (decorations),'' she said. ``You walk in and it really makes you feel like Christmas.'' But even Mrs. Morris gets tired of the hoopla. ``Sometimes I have to act like I'm asleep,'' she said. ``He'll just keep talking.'' 
A woman killed her four children and then fatally shot herself Wednesday at their rural home near the Missouri border, authorities said. ``The bodies were discovered when the father came home from work,'' Adams County Sheriff Robert Nall said. Sheila Epker, 27, apparently drowned her oldest daughter, Casey, in a bathtub, then shot daughters Shannon and Mandy, son Lance and herself, Nall said. ``I've been in law enforcement for 19 years, and this is the most gruesome thing I have ever seen,'' the sheriff said. The killings apparently occurred between 3:30 p.m. and 5:15 p.m. Greg Epker, 32, returned home from his job at Century Signs Inc. in Quincy and found the bodies, the sheriff said. Mendon, with a population of nearly 1,000, is about 10 miles north of Quincy and 135 miles northwest of St. Louis. The sheriff said Epker was taken to St. Mary's Hospital in Quincy for shock. ``We're trying to determine the sequence of events and what took place,'' Nall said. ``At this point, we have found no motive. It was a spontaneous event, and we don't know what happened. ``We may never know exactly,'' he said. Neighbors said the family has lived in Mendon for about seven years. The children apparently ranged in age from 1 to 8. Mayor Gene Rogers, an insurance salesman, said the violence is uncommon for the small town. ``We've got a grocery, a gas station, a bank and variety store _ that's pretty much Mendon, except for one oil company that services the local area,'' Rogers said. Ron Durk, owner of the town bowling alley, said he lives only as few yards from the Epker family. ``We didn't know them too much. We'd just see her out there in the yard with the kids in the summertime. ... Something like this is unbelievable,'' Durk said. ``Something had to snap,'' he said. ``You just can't imagine anyone doing anything like that.'' 
Wives of crewmen aboard the USS John F. Kennedy said they are worried the carrier's homecoming early next month might be delayed because the ship's planes shot down two Libyan jets. ``Why did it have to happen now?'' Lesley Friedman, head of a homecoming committee, wondered after Wednesday's encounter in the Mediterranean. ``My first thought was, `Oh, no, does that mean they're going to come home later than expected?''' said Connie Derrick, wife of an aviation maintenance officer aboard the ship. ``Everybody's pretty anxious for word, anxious and concerned,'' said Paula Boot, wife of an electronic communications specialist. ``Everybody's banding together, waiting for the next step.'' Mrs. Boot said she heard news reports about the attack when she woke up Wednesday. ``The alarm clock went off and it was the first thing I heard. It made me sit up straight in bed,'' she said. ``Not a great way to start the day.'' The Kennedy and 11 other ships left Norfolk on Aug. 2 for a six-month deployment. Family members already have been making plans to welcome the ships home early next month, although an exact date will not be announced until about 10 days before arrival. On the Kennedy's last cruise to the Mediterranean in 1987, its return to Norfolk was delayed about two weeks because of tensions in the Middle East. ``I'm so afraid that that's going to happen again,'' said Mrs. Friedman, whose husband is a weapons officer on the ship. After worrying the ship might be delayed, the wives said they got scared for their husbands' safety in the Middle East. ``I don't trust those people. I don't trust the Iranians and the Libyans. I put them all in one group,'' Mrs. Friedman said. ``I've just been praying about it,'' Mrs. Derrick said. ``I think the men must feel good about what they're doing on the ship because that's what they're trained to do. It's probably frightening for them. On the other hand, it must make them feel good.'' The Navy's newest carrier, the Theodore Roosevelt, left Norfolk last week to replace the Kennedy in the Mediterranean. The wives and Navy spokesman said they had no indication the Kennedy's return would be delayed. Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci said two F-14s from the Kennedy shot down the Libyan jets because the American aircraft were threatened while conducting routine operations in international waters. No Americans were injured. The Navy has no plans to release the names of the fliers involved in the attack, said Lt. Cmdr. Jim Kudla, a Navy spokesman in Washington. 
The Nikkei Stock Average closed at 30,183.79 points, down 59.87 points, on the Tokyo Stock Exchange Thursday. 
